How Study Scale Drives Exposure Data Collection Methods
Assessing how a community will be affected by natural hazards requires a fundamental understanding of the elements at risk. The type of data needed for a hazard impact assessment depends on the nature of the problem that is being addressed and is independent of the location or scale of the problem. In direct contrast to this, for projects with limited resources (e.g., time, funding), the methods used for data collection depend on the scale of the study.
If the goal of a natural hazard impact assessment is to understand whether a particular feature will be affected by a certain level of hazard, then it will be enough to simply know the location of that feature, and whether the location lies in a zone of potential hazard. For example, landowners who want to know whether their land is likely to be inundated by a flood need only locate their land within published flood hazard information. This example demonstrates scale independence: if the entire population sought this information, it would still be necessary to know only the location of land relative to zones of hazard.
In contrast, if the aim of a study is to understand the potential economic losses and casualties that could result from a natural hazard, then it is necessary to understand more than just the location of a feature. For the quantitative estimates required by this more comprehensive risk assessment, understanding the type of construction materials, the age of construction, and the number of people within a building is necessary. Note that while additional information is required in this example, the information is still independent of the scale of the study: whether data are for a single household or every household in a megacity, assessing the possible economic losses from flooding requires information about the number of stories in a building and its construction type and age.
The same example that demonstrates scale independence for the type of data collected demonstrates scale dependence for data collection methods. For the individual landowner/household, firsthand observation is the most effective method for collecting relevant data, regardless of whether they are for a simplistic “wet/not wet” assessment or a quantified estimate of risk to inform an insurance policy. However, undertaking either of these types of assessments through firsthand individual data capture at a megacity, national, or regional scale is impractical and likely impossible.
__Source:__ A. T. Jones, K. Van Putten, M. Jakab (Geoscience Australia); M. L. Bautista, B. C. Bautista, I. C. Narag (Philippine Institute of Volcanology and Seismology); A. Wibowo (Badan Nasional Penanggulangan Bencana); K. Chapman (Humanitarian OpenStreetMap Team).