Participatory Earthquake Risk Assessment in Dhaka
While Bangladesh can rightfully claim major accomplishments in flood and cyclone risk reduction, its urban earthquake risk has not been adequately considered. Bangladesh lies on the seismically active northeastern Indian plate, which is subject to moderate- to large-magnitude earthquakes. The nearest major fault line is believed to run less than 60km from the capital city of Dhaka. Research suggests that an earthquake of up to magnitude 7.5 is possible in the area. Earthquake risk in Bangladesh is increasing with rapid and uncontrolled urbanization, particularly in and around Dhaka, which with 26,000 residents per square kilometer is one of the world’s densest cities.(a)
There has been no major earthquake in living memory, which has frustrated efforts to build consensus around the need to invest in measures to increase urban resilience to earthquake. Moreover, the governance of cities in Bangladesh, particularly Dhaka, is very complex. Responsibility for urban planning, governance, and public service provision is spread out across many different agencies. Agencies’ roles are not clear and often overlap. Moreover, political affiliations can affect capacity to implement policy and govern the city. Thus any initiative intended to address Dhaka’s vulnerability to earthquake required engagement with multiple stakeholders and a common understanding of risk.
A participatory earthquake risk assessment over the last two years in Bangladeshb has successfully built consensus on disaster risk across agencies, institutions, and technical experts in their pursuit of earthquake risk reduction and is now being leveraged to develop specific investments to enhance urban resilience. The program has increased the collective understanding of risk, promoted collaboration in identifying major disincentives for resilient development, supported planning for prevention, and has gradually shifted the country toward a more proactive approach to resilient development. A successful aspect of this program involved ensuring that stakeholders from over 40 different agencies working in Dhaka guided each step of the project and assessed the collective progress toward achieving project goals. Participants in the project were assigned to one of three groups depending on their job and type of expertise: a focus group, an advisory committee, or a scientific consortium. Focus group members included representatives from key national and local organizations involved in planning or in developing and implementing construction codes; therefore their role involved engaging in data collection, analysis, and validation. The advisory committee is made up of policy makers and decision makers from various government and nongovernment institutions who provide overall guidance and oversight to project participants. The scientific consortium is made up of local experts in earthquake engineering, geology and geophysics, land use and regional planning, DRM, law and business administration, environmental management, and other closely related fields; collectively they provide guidance on scientific and technical matters. Next steps include the development of multiyear process that will develop several decision-making tools for mitigating the impact of earthquake hazards by reducing structural and nonstructural vulnerability. Diverse working groups will mobilize resources and implement the project; existing earthquake hazard and vulnerability data will be compiled; a uniform data platform will be developed; and an information, education, and communication program will be established. Building on this foundation, the project will produce (a) an earthquake hazard, vulnerability, and risk analysis; (b) an assessment of legal and institutional arrangements; and (c) a guide to incorporating earthquake risk management into land-use planning.
a. Data are for Dhaka City Corporation; if the entire Dhaka Metropolitan Area is taken into account, Dhaka’s population density is 13,500 residents per square kilometer (World Bank 2012a).b. The assessment is called the Bangladesh Earthquake Risk Mitigation Program and is a World Bank program supported by the GFDRR.__Source:__ Swarna Kazi (World Bank).