Global Exposure Data Sets
///Global human exposure./// Global models of human exposure mostly describe population data either on a regular grid or in specific settlement coordinates or geographical boundaries. A widely used product is the Gridded Population of the World (GPWv3), a gridded data set that provides a spatially disaggregated population layer constructed from national or subnational input units of varying resolutions.a The native grid cell resolution is 2.5 arc-minutes. Population estimates are provided for the years 1990, 1995, and 2000, and are projected to 2005, 2010, and 2015. Other global human exposure models include commercially available LandScan (Bhaduri et al. 2007) and the open WorldPop. These models are based on the integration of several information sources, including census and remote sensing, and are affected by a significant range of uncertainties (Potere et al. 2009; Mondal and Tatem 2012). ///Characterization of global built-up area./// The Global Human Settlement Layer (GHSL) is developed and maintained by the Joint Research Centre of the European Commission. GHSL integrates several available sources about human settlements with information extracted from multispectral satellite images. The underlying automatic image information extraction work flow makes use of multi-resolution (0.5m–10m), multi-platform, multi-sensor (pan, multispectral), and multi-temporal satellite image data (Pesaresi and Halkia 2012). The Global Urban Footprint is being developed by the German Aerospace Center (DLR) and is based on the analysis of Synthetic Aperture Radar (SAR) and optical satellite data. The project intends to cover the extent of the large urbanized areas of megacities for four time slices: 1975, 1990, 2000, and 2010 (Taubenböck et al. 2012).
///Global description of building stock./// Several global exposure databases include physical exposure information; examples include PAGER, the Global Exposure Database for the 2013 Global Assessment Report on Disaster Risk Reduction (GED-13), and the Global Exposure Database for GEM (GED4GEM).b Using the CAPRA platform (Cardona et al. 2012), GED-13 aims to create an open global building and population inventory suitable mainly for earthquake and cyclone probabilistic risk modelling. It employs building type classifications for different size categories of settlements as developed by the World Agency of Planetary Monitoring and Earthquake Risk Reduction (Wyss et al. 2013). The goal of the GED4GEM (Dell’Acqua, Gamba, and Jaiswal 2012) is to create an open homogenized database of the global building stock and population distribution, with spatial, structural, and occupancy-related information at different scales, as input to the GEM risk platform OpenQuake.c Its building type classifications follow the GEM taxonomy, which is designed primarily for earthquake vulnerability assessments, and its multi-scale database structure contains information on buildings and populations from the country scale down to the per-building scale. The initial version of GED4GEM, planned for late 2014 release, will contain aggregate information on population, built area, and reconstruction costs of residential and nonresidential buildings at 1km resolution. Detailed data sets on single buildings will be integrated for a selected number of areas and will increase over time. 
a. See the Gridded Population of the World website at http://sedac.ciesin.columbia.edu/data/collection/gpw-v3.
b. For PAGER, see Wald et al. (2008) and the website at http://earthquake.usgs.gov/earthquakes/pager/; for GED13, see De Bono (2013); for GED4GEM, see http://www.nexus.globalquakemodel.org/ged4gem/posts.
c. For OpenQuake, see http://www.globalquakemodel.org/openquake/about/.
__Source:__ Massimiliano Pittore, Marc Wieland, and Kevin Fleming, “From Remote Sensing to Crowdsourcing: Perspectives of a Global, Dynamic Exposure Model for Georisk Assessment,” input paper prepared for the 2015 Global Assessment Report on Disaster Risk Reduction, available at www.preventionweb.net/gar.