A Cost-Benefit Analysis of Livestock Protection in Disaster Risk Management
Animal-related income streams are critical to underlying causes of risk and provide economic and social well-being in the world’s poorest and most vulnerable regions. Protecting livestock is crucial because it protects the livelihoods of livestock producers and guarantees food security for millions of people. 
To learn more about the role of livestock protection in disaster risk management (DRM), the World Society for the Protection of Animals (WSPA) commissioned Economists at Large Pty Ltd to conduct a cost-benefit analysis of a WSPA intervention in the Mwingi District in Kenya. The intervention began in 2011, in response to long-lasting drought conditions, and involved treating livestock brought to WSPA’s Mwingi operation to increase the likelihood that the animals would survive until the next rainy season. 
The analysis focused on the household income impacts to owners of livestock who brought their animals for treatment. Beyond this, the analysis sought both to understand the economic impact of livestock operations on local and regional economies and to create an applicable and scalable risk reduction model that would assess vulnerabilities and return on investment strategies within livestock-dependent communities.
To assess the number of animals reached and the total cost of WSPA's intervention, WSPA post-intervention response reports were used. The potential income derived from animals treated was considered the benefit of the intervention. For the sake of this preliminary analysis, it was assumed that half of the animals treated would have died had they not received treatment. 
The intervention is estimated to have generated $2.74 of benefits in the form of avoided losses for every $1.00 spent. If the time period for potential income generated by the livestock is extended to three years and the cumulative effect of secured livelihoods is taken into account, the benefit-cost ratio increases to $6.69 in benefits for every $1.00 spent. Based on the research described here, WSPA is developing a framework for estimating the impacts on communities and households of losing livestock in a disaster. 
__Source:__ Nicole Fassina, World Society for the Protection of Animals, "Cost-Benefit Analysis of Livestock Protection in Disaster Risk Management," input paper prepared for the 2015 Global Assessment Report on Disaster Risk Reduction, available at www.preventionweb.net/gar; based on Economists at Large, __Cost-benefit Analysis of WSPA’s Mwingi Intervention in Kenya__ (Melbourne: World Society of the Protection of Animals, 2013). 