## Creating Platforms and Partnerships to Enable the Development of Risk Assessments

The move to collect, analyze, and produce risk information for current and future climates is gaining momentum among various actors at various levels, from the individual to the global. One consequence of this trend is a growing need for all actors involved with risk to cooperate, communicate, and form partnerships across geographic, institutional, and disciplinary boundaries. Fortunately, much progress has been made in this regard.

The recognition that cooperation and partnership are crucial for building resiliency motivated the formation in 2010 of the Understanding Risk community, whose more than 3,000 members span the globe and include experts and practitioners across many professions and disciplines (see box 2-11 for more detail). Information sharing is critical to this community, which meets every two years to discuss best practices and promising innovations in disaster risk assessment and to give members an opportunity to build and strengthen partnerships and spur further innovations. 

The Global Earthquake Model suggests some of the benefits that arise when developing and applying knowledge is treated as a cooperative endeavor.<sup>20</sup> GEM was created specifically as a public-private partnership because its founders judged that structure to be optimal for its purposes. They recognized that risk holders reside in both sectors; that advocacy, models, and information are necessary for mitigating earthquake risk; that the project could achieve its goals only by combining funds from both sectors; and that the involvement of both sectors would lend the project credibility and momentum. GEM’s formal partners include 13 private companies, 15 public organizations representing nations, and 9 international organizations. Various other associate participants and organizational members of international consortia also deliver global projects.  

One notable aspect of GEM as a public-private partnership is its success in unifying diverse perspectives under a common interest. The partnership works because both sectors seek the same outcome: credible, accessible risk information that is widely used and understood. At the same time, the two sectors have somewhat different focuses. Private sector partners generally seek to reduce future financial losses (through strict building codes and through open data that ensure common expectations of loss); to create new markets for insurance products (requiring worldwide intercomparable loss data and accessible risk information); and to build customer demand (through increased engagement among trusted local experts and increased understanding of risk by the public). Public sector partners, including nongovernmental organizations, seek to reduce future casualties, economic loss, and disruptions (through DRM and land-use policies and retrofitting of public buildings); to implement policy (requiring broad awareness of risk and hence accessible data); to base decisions on scientifically defensible hazard and risk estimates; and to reduce the need for post-disaster aid (requiring free, open information to support markets for financial risk transfer mechanisms and lower losses as a result of risk reduction). 

The perspectives and positions of the two sectors do not differ as widely as GEM’s founders initially anticipated. In practice, differences in perspective varied within each sector as much as or more than they did across sectors.  

Yet another collaboration that aims to build better risk information is the Willis Research Network, which links more than 50 international research institutions to the expertise of the financial and insurance sector in order to support scientists’ quantification of natural hazard risk. More detail on the network is in box 2-12. For an account of another kind of collaboration—one in which scientists, engineers, and developers of building codes collaborated with officials in planning, governance, and public service to promote a more earthquake-resilient city—see the account of participatory earthquake risk assessment in Dhaka in box 2-13.