Risk assessments require hazard, exposure, and vulnerability data at the appropriate scale as well as models with the appropriate resolution to address the problem of interest. They also require a considered approach to building multidisciplinary, multi-institutional platforms and nontraditional partnerships around the technical analysis. In this section, we discuss these aspects by reviewing promising innovations in risk assessment over the last decade and highlighting some of the greatest remaining challenges.

## Hazard Assessment
Essential steps required to quantify risk are the identification of the relevant hazard(s) and the collection of hazard-related data. Although these steps usually occur at the start of a risk assessment, they are often not easy or straightforward. They often involve deciding whether to undertake a single hazard or multi-hazard assessment of the primary hazards and then deciding whether to consider secondary (or cascading) hazards that may be triggered by a primary hazard event—for example, fire or tsunami after earthquake.  
 
These are not simple decisions. Since it is a rare country or community that is affected by only a single hazard, assessments that consider the full range of hazard events often achieve greater traction; on the other hand, the level of investment for considering all hazards may be too great, or momentum following a disaster event may be driving interest in single hazard. Adding the complexity of secondary hazards will further increase the resource and data requirements and may significantly broaden the institutions involved in a risk assessment. For example, considerations of fire after an earthquake require additional data sets, as well as engagement with fire authorities and energy and water companies. These challenges are discussed further in box 2-1. 

Once the hazards of interest are defined, the next step often involves acquiring a variety of hazard-related data. The most fundamental data define historical events, in particular their date, geographical location and extent, and maximum intensity. Historical events are often used in deterministic analyses that assess the impact of past events with current exposure. Historical event information is also used to estimate the probability of a hazard occurring at a location with a specific intensity. 

An __event set__ comprises a suite of stochastic, or computationally generated, synthetic hazard events with statistical characteristics consistent with the historical record. Such event sets can typically include thousands or tens of thousands of potential events and are intended to define the full range of potential events for a hazard. Event sets are used with other information to quantify probabilities of loss and risk from a hazard. 

Additional information is used to define the spatial distribution of the forces (e.g., the wind field from a tropical cyclone or the ground motion from an earthquake) associated with a hazard event. Such information is often incomplete or unavailable and in most cases must be derived from a very limited set of observations. Typically, a combination of observational data and theory is used to define the spatial and temporal characteristics of an event. A collection of the spatial, intensity, and temporal characteristics for events in an event set is termed a __hazard catalog__.
 
Hazard catalogs and event sets can be used with risk models in a deterministic or probabilistic manner. Deterministic risk models are used to assess the impact of specific events on exposure. Typical scenarios for a deterministic analysis include renditions of past historical events, worst-case scenarios, or possible events at different return periods.<sup>12</sup> For example, a deterministic risk (or impact) analysis will provide a robust estimation of the potential building damage, mortality/morbidity, and economic loss from a single hazard scenario. Risk models are used in a probabilistic sense when an event set contains a sufficient number of events for the estimate of the risk to converge at the longest return period, or the smallest probability, of interest. In other words, a probabilistic risk model contains a compilation of all possible “impact scenarios” for a specific hazard and geographical area. Note that hazard catalogs are generally associated with rapid onset hazards. Risk assessments for slow onset hazards, such as drought, are typically undertaken using deterministic approaches. (Additional issues associated with modelling drought risk and impacts are discussed in box 2-2. For a cost-benefit approach to risk that deals with the effects of drought on livestock, see box 2-3).

Convergence of results is a concern when using a risk model probabilistically. As a simple example, consider a simulation of 100 years of hazard events. This simulation is too short to determine the 100-year return period. A random sample of 100 years of events could easily omit events, or include multiple instances of the same event, that on average would occur once every 100 years and therefore dramatically affect determination of return period.

Figure 2-1 illustrates this challenge. If the sample size (1900 and after) is the historical record, then it would appear that extreme flood and drought are not a concern. Similarly, if we consider the period 1800–1900, flood would be seen as a risk, but not drought. Herein lies the challenge of determining the return period for rare and extreme hazard events. In the case of hydrometeorological cycles, determining the return period is difficult; for geophysical hazards such as volcanic eruptions and large earthquakes, which may occur every 1,000, 10,000, or 100,000 years, it is incredibly complex.

A variety of hazard-dependent data are required to generate a hazard catalog. Knowledge of the distribution of soil types, for example, is required to model the spatial variation of ground acceleration (shaking) from an earthquake; values for surface roughness are needed to define the distribution of wind speed from a tropical cyclone; and a digital elevation model (DEM) is needed to determine flood depth. Fortunately, some data can be common to multiple perils. For example, topography as defined by a DEM is required for modelling floods, tsunamis, sea-level-rise inundation, landslide susceptibility, storm surges, and detection of earthquake fault lines. 

Hazard data can be open, proprietary, or (if they have yet to be collected) unavailable. Even available data may be usable to different degrees—for example, data may not be digitized, may lack necessary metadata, or may require substantial improvement before use. A compilation of publicly available hazard-related data with global coverage is given in table 2-1. Some of these data sets, such as the records for the location and intensity of earthquakes and tropical cyclones, provide global coverage and are considered authoritative records that compile the best available data.<sup>13</sup> Other global data sets may not be of optimal quality for risk assessment. For example, openly available topographic data are not optimal for modelling hydrometeorological hazards because of their relatively coarse resolution. Poor resolution of elevation data has a significant impact on flood risk, since small changes in elevation can involve huge changes in the predicted inundation area in many relatively flat floodplains and coastlines. 

The spatial characteristics of an event are usually defined by combining theoretical and empirical knowledge with other observational hazard-related data because of the sparseness of the relevant observations. For example, quantifying the wind field for a tropical cyclone as it travels inland highlights the difficulty of estimating the spatial distribution of a hazard. Wind speed and pressure measurements from observing stations can be used to estimate two parameters, a cyclone’s maximum wind and the radius of maximum wind. It is often impossible to obtain high-quality measurements, however: the number of observational platforms is limited, existing observation stations are not sited optimally, power may fail during the cyclone, and anemometers may be damaged by flying debris. Surface pressure measurements of the cyclone are easier to collect, and the minimum central pressure has a large influence on maximum wind speeds, but these surface pressures must be converted to surface wind speeds for risk modelling purposes, and this is where the theoretical and empirical knowledge is critical. 

Most hazard event sets and catalogs are developed region by region. Exceptions include the global earthquake event set generated by the Global Earthquake Model (GEM), and the tsunami, volcanic eruption, cyclone, and drought hazard event sets developed as part of the global risk model under the leadership of the UN Office for Disaster Risk Reduction. There are also a number of efforts to develop global flood models, which will use a global flood catalog; one model, GLOFRIS (GLObal Flood Risk with IMAGE Scenarios), is already in use (see section 3-23 for a more detailed discussion).

A critical requirement acknowledged by all experts working in hazard modelling is the need for a high-resolution, open DEM. Currently, the 90m Shuttle Radar Topography Mission (SRTM) is the only global open DEM, with 30m resolution available in some countries. Satellite-based Interferometric Synthetic Aperture Radar (InSAR) appears to be one promising approach for generating these data on a global scale; one satellite currently using InSAR is the TerraSAR/Tandem-X of DLR (German Aerospace Center) and Astrium Geo-Information Services. A growing alternative to a satellite-based collection of elevation data is the use of airplanes and/or helicopters to derive high-resolution surface data on a smaller scale via LiDAR<sup>14</sup> or airborne InSAR. Both of these “active” methods, while expensive, are capable of generating very accurate and high-resolution surface and terrain elevations. Collection of LiDAR data is growing across the globe; however, the cost, time, and technical processing aspects of this approach prohibit its widespread accessibility. 

There are two types of DEMs: a digital surface elevation model and a digital terrain model. A digital surface elevation model provides surface elevations that describe the elevations of features such as buildings and treetops. A digital terrain model provides elevations of the bare ground surface and neglects objects such as buildings and trees. The impact of the different models on hazard and risk assessments can be significant—see box 2-4—but the combination of these different DEMs offers opportunities for better characterizing the built environment.<sup>15</sup>

To assess risk from multiple meteorological hazards on a global scale, one should consider the hazards’ spatial and temporal correlations and how they vary as a function of climate. For example, the probability of tropical cyclone landfall varies as a function of the El Niño-Southern Oscillation (ENSO) along the Queensland coast of Australia, the U.S. coastline, and in the northwest Pacific. Generally, warm El Niño years are associated with a reduced rate of landfall, and cool La Niña years are associated with a higher rate of landfall (Flay and Nott 2007; Elsner and Jagger 2006; Wu, Chang, and Leung 2004). There are also possible cross-peril correlations. In many areas, for example, flood risk and drought risk are strongly correlated with ENSO.

The response of meteorological hazards to natural climate variability highlights the possibility that the risk from these hazards will respond to future changes in climate. It is difficult to specify with certainty how hazard occurrence and intensity will change by region, and this is an area of significant research and modelling.<sup>16</sup> S A case study described in section 3-24 highlights the changing risk associated with future changes in tropical cyclone activity in the Pacific region. Regardless of the uncertainties associated with quantifying future changes in meteorological hazards, sea level is certain to rise in response to melting of continental ice caps and thermal expansion of seawater. Higher sea levels will exacerbate coastal flooding from storm surge, intense precipitation events, and tsunami inundation.

Climate change and sea-level rise are not the only future threats for coastal regions. Many coastal regions suffer from severe subsidence. In some locations the increase in subsidence is much larger than the sea-level rise. For example, in Jakarta the subsidence is currently over 10cm per year. According to Brinkman and Hartman (2008), Jakarta is heading toward a disaster with the juxtaposition of the high sea tides and the subsidence rate. Up to 4 million people and approximately 25 percent of the city will be affected by inundation from the sea within the next 15 years if action is not taken.