## Aligning and Targeting Risk Assessments 
Risk assessment as applied to DRM can easily be framed around the formula __risk = hazard X exposure X vulnerability__.<sup>10</sup> Under this single formula, however, there is considerable variation in the types of and purposes for risk assessment. In the DRM community, risk assessments are generally undertaken for one (or more) of five reasons:

1. .Risk identification. Understanding, communicating, and raising awareness of disaster risk
2. .Risk reduction. Informing policies, investments, and structural and nonstructural measures intended to reduce risk
3. .Preparedness. Informing early warning systems and emergency measures and supporting preparedness and contingency planning at various levels
4. .Financial protection. Developing financial applications to manage and/or transfer risk.
5. .Resilient reconstruction. Informing early and rapid estimates of damage and providing critical information for reconstruction

Determining what constitutes a suitable risk assessment product depends not only on the purpose of the assessment, but on a number of other factors as well: which decision makers and stakeholders are involved, how the results will be used, the scale and resolution at which the assessment will be carried out, the data requirements for the assessment, the complexity of the analysis, and the resources available. Table 1-1 lists a range of assessment products for various purposes, each with different attributes.

Experience has shown that when a risk assessment is well targeted to a purpose and end-user, it has a greater chance of success&mdash;that is, the information it generates is more likely to be used for decision making. It is therefore critical that there be consensus on a risk assessment's objective, that it be designed to meet the project's basic requirements and standards, and that it not exceed available resources (money, personnel, time).

To understand how various factors influence risk assessment design, consider two different risk assessment products, one a community-based assessment that aims to engage communities in disaster risk reduction, to communicate risk, and to promote local action (second row of table 1-1), and the other a catastrophic risk assessment for financial planning (bottom row). The community-based assessment involves local stakeholders&mdash;communities and local government&mdash;and can be used in building community preparedness, supporting contingency planning, and identifying vulnerable assets. On the other hand, it cannot be used in developing financial applications and will seldom be used in planning significant investments in risk reduction, or in carrying out land-use planning. In contrast, a catastrophic risk assessment for financial planning involves a different set of stakeholders&mdash;ministries of finance, international and domestic financial markets, modelling companies, and insurance and reinsurance companies&mdash;and is carried out on a larger (national to multi-country) scale using high-quality, high-resolution data. This type of analysis is rarely used for local DRM or community preparedness.<sup>11</sup>