<blockquote>Earthquakes, droughts, floods and storms are natural hazards, but unnatural disasters are deaths and damages that result from human acts of omission and commission. Every disaster is unique, but each exposes actions&mdash;by individuals and governments at different levels&mdash;that, had they been different, would have resulted in fewer deaths and less damage. 
__&mdash;World Bank and United Nations, Natural Hazards, UnNatural Disasters__</blockquote>

A disaster-related risk assessment provides an opportunity **before** a disaster event to determine the likely deaths, damages, and losses (direct and indirect) that will result, and to highlight which actions will be most effective in reducing the impacts on individuals, communities, and governments. This ability to model disaster loss and to provide robust analysis on the costs and benefits of risk preparedness, reduction, and avoidance has made disaster risk assessments a powerful tool in disaster risk management (DRM). As a result, the number of risk assessments being undertaken is growing, innovation has flourished, and a vast array of approaches, experiences, and lessons learned now exists.

Experience has shown that a disaster risk assessment does not represent the conclusion of a process, but instead provides a foundation for a long-term engagement focused on the communication and use of the risk information. Proactive responses to new risk information include retrofitting buildings to withstand the assessed seismic risk, developing new land-use plans, designing financial protection measures, and equipping and training emergency responders.  

In the context of rapidly growing disaster losses and high-profile catastrophic disasters, it is often difficult to imagine reducing the impact from hazard events. However, societies have successfully overcome similar challenges in the past. For centuries, urban fires were a global concern for the public, private, and finance sectors, as well as for the communities directly affected. Urban fires devastated Rome in 64 CE, London in 1666, Moscow in 1812, Chicago in 1871, and Boston in 1872; the 1906 San Francisco fire destroyed nearly 95 percent of the city, and the Tokyo fire of 1923 killed over 40,000 people. Yet we do not see urban fires any more, and this hazard has largely been consigned to history. The reasons&mdash; implementation of modern building codes, land-use planning, establishment and expansion of emergency services, greater citizen responsibility, and insurance regulations&mdash;are essentially the same levers that we can apply to consigning natural disaster events to history.  

We have already seen construction practices evolving in response to cyclones and earthquakes, and some areas have strict urban and land-use plans designed to reduce loss from flood. California, for example, has implemented a series of building code changes in response to earthquake<sup>9</sup>&mdash;changes that today represent a reduction in risk. Recent earthquakes in Chile, New Zealand, and Japan have dramatically demonstrated the influence of enforced building codes in reducing death, damage, and loss. These examples show that a society can reduce vulnerability and risk. But for these efforts to succeed, there must be robust and accessible information on hazard, exposure, and vulnerability, models that integrate this information and quantify risk, and the commitment and resources to prioritize actions needed to implement risk reduction.
The World Bank's approach to investment in DRM through better risk information is summarized in box 1-1.