Risk Assessments as an Advocacy Tool for DRM in the Middle East and North Africa 
In 2008, GFDRR provided seed funding to help scale up DRM engagements in the Middle East and North Africa. Djibouti, Morocco, and Yemen received US$70,000, US$100,000, and US$150,000, respectively, to fund rapid risk profiling and assessment. These projects enabled each country to better understand and more effectively communicate risk, and they sparked new cooperation in risk management across ministries. With additional funding for risk mitigation in the housing, infrastructure, energy, and education sectors, government leaders partnered with the UN and European Union to carry out post-disaster needs assessments in Djibouti (for the 2011 drought, with funding of $60 million) and Yemen (for flooding in 2008, with funding of $30 million). 
In all three countries, risk assessments were used as an advocacy tool. That is, the assessment results showing the potential average annual losses arising from a disaster were used to sensitize finance ministers to the need for DRM. With finance ministers aware of the cost of inaction, technical assistance was expanded to multi-sectoral programmatic risk management: early warning systems, risk management laboratories, and knowledge centers were established, and risk reduction information was integrated into development plans and strategies. Following the success of this approach, risk assessments were initiated by government authorities in Algeria and Saudi Arabia with the aim of sensitizing relevant ministries to the importance of DRM, influencing vulnerability reduction strategies and financial disaster risk transfer instruments, and leveraging best practices. Partly as a result of getting finance ministries to recognize DRM’s importance, most countries in the  Middle East and North Africa have made progress in DRM in recent years. Especially notable is the shift in these countries away from reactive response to disaster to more proactive DRM—a shift that signals increased commitment to HFA objectives and priorities.
__Source__: Andrea Zanon (World Bank).