Southeast Europe and Caucasus Catastrophe Risk Insurance Facility
 The Southeast Europe and Caucasus Catastrophe Risk Insurance Facility (SEEC CRIF) project was created to respond to a growing demand from Southeast European countries for assistance in reducing their fiscal vulnerability to natural disasters and for greater access to high-quality and affordable catastrophe insurance products for homeowners and small to medium enterprises.(a) In support of these efforts, the World Bank provided financial and technical assistance to Albania, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, and Serbia to establish the Europa Reinsurance Facility (Europa Re). 
The main objective of Europa Re is to increase access to affordable catastrophe insurance products for homeowners and to facilitate the development of the catastrophe insurance market in member countries. Specifically, Europa Re aims to increase the level of catastrophe insurance coverage from the current 1–2 percent to 10–25 percent over the next 5 to 10 years. The design of Europa Re follows that of similar successful catastrophe insurance programs in Turkey and Romania. The Turkish catastrophe insurance pool, for example, currently provides coverage for over 6 million households, while the Romanian catastrophe insurance program insures over 5 million. 
Increased access to insurance products will occur through investment in key areas. These include educating homeowners and business owners about the exposure of their properties and businesses to natural hazards; improving and standardizing catastrophe insurance products’ credit quality; providing support to enable insurance companies to sell complex weather and catastrophe risk insurance products; and helping governments and insurance regulators enact regulatory and policy reforms that promote the development of catastrophe and weather risk markets.  
A critical factor underpinning the success of the SEEC CRIF is access to high-quality and high-resolution catastrophe risk models, which have been developed for FYR Macedonia, Serbia, and Albania by AIR Worldwide. For example, earthquake loss estimates are now available for these countries; they give a 1 percent exceedance probability for losses of €1.15 billion, €611 million, and €955 million for Albania, FYR Macedonia, and Serbia, respectively; a sample seismic hazard map produced in this analysis is shown here.

Seismic hazard map for Albania, FYR Macedonia, and Serbia showing horizontal peak ground acceleration at the surface with an exceedance probability of 10 percent in 50 years (equivalent to a mean return period of 475 years). 
a. The program is strongly endorsed by and has received financial support from multiple donors, including European Union, UNISDR, Swiss State Secretariat for Economic Affairs, and Global Environment Facility.__Source__: Europa Re.

__Note__: MRP = mean return period; EQ = earthquake.