International Charter Space and Major Disasters 
A good example of the potential of satellite EO can be seen in the International Charter Space and Major Disasters (www.disastercharter.org), an international collaboration among space agencies that uses space technology to aid in response to disasters. When a disaster occurs, the International Charter grants access to satellite data at no cost and in a rapid fashion. The Charter aims to help better organize, direct, and mobilize national disaster management resources during emergencies and to assist the international relief community in situations requiring humanitarian assistance. The only users who can submit requests are Authorized Users, a predefined list of organizations with a mandate related to DRM. The Charter is focused on hazards with rapid onset scenarios, in the immediate response phase, and aims to service operational users wherever a disaster occurs. Since its inception in 2000 it has delivered services over 400 times in well over 100 countries.  
To cite the Charter and its dramatic evolution over the last decade as progress toward risk assessment may be surprising, given the Charter’s response-only focus. Yet the Charter remains a striking example of what space agencies working together can achieve. By raising the profile of satellites in disaster response, the Charter has greatly increased the DRM community’s interest in EO satellite data and EO-based solutions. Satellite based geo-information can contribute to the entire cycle of risk management, including mitigation, warning, response, and recovery. To date, much of the DRM effort of the EO sector has been focused on disaster response and recovery, which by its nature attracts more attention but also more resources than pre-crisis phases. Stronger ties to end-users and increased collaboration with DRM practitioners would increase the impact of EO-based response activities such as those of the Charter. At the same time, meeting the ongoing need for information by supplying large volumes of data over large areas is very different from meeting the more limited needs arising during the response phase; and within the context of existing systems, supplying EO data for disaster mitigation on a global basis represents a clear operational challenge for satellite agencies.