Factors Leading to Successful Technical Capacity Building The success of the programs involving collaboration by Geoscience Australia and the governments of Indonesia and the Philippines demonstrates that government-to-government cooperation is an effective mechanism for technical capacity building. This observation is supported by recent research that indicates G2G capacity building is more effective and sustainable than postgraduate training, learning by doing, and centers of excellence.(a) Two broad factors led to successful capacity building in the G2G partnerships between Australia and Indonesia/Philippines: the presence of trust and use of a catalytic approach.The G2G projects showed repeatedly the importance of trust as a foundation for working relationships between technical experts. These projects suggest that trust develops for a variety of reasons:
+ .Experts’ knowledge and skill make them credible. Technical experts’ ability to communicate with and speak the same technical language as recipient partners—the language of science and engineering—is a critical first step in building credibility, which in turn is the basis for developing relationships of trust. + .Government scientists have shared experience. Their common understanding of government operations and the science-to-policy cycle can solidify foundations of trust built through scientific expertise. + .G2G relationships are institutional and national. As such, they can be an effective basis for long-term cooperation, diplomacy, and trust between partner countries. + .Personal agendas are absent. Officials solely delivering to a government mandate feel less pressure to seek a high profile or to publish project findings under their own name, and are more willing to maintain a supportive role in the background. 
The catalytic approach exemplified in the G2G projects described above focuses not on replacing or displacing capacity, but on building or strengthening capacity. It does so specifically by showing the technical capacity the project delivers; by demonstrating the added value of science; and by serving ad hoc needs of counterparts. The catalytic approach fosters improvement in processes and cooperation between partners through ongoing successful activities of mutual benefit.  
 A critical first step in using the catalytic approach is for the agencies within which capacity is being developed to identify their own capacity gaps (Simpson and Dhu 2009). Once these gaps are known, it becomes possible to showcase the potential impact of science in addressing them—without taking on a structural role or starting work that in the long run should be done by the recipient agency. The initial steps should always involve gaining an understanding of how the existing system works or should work, so that capacity-building efforts can focus on realizing or strengthening this system.
Capacity-building interventions require a long-term, consistent, and predictable investment that facilitates repeated application of improvements, reinforcing changes until they are sustainable. Strengthening public sector systems is complex and involves individual, institutional, and sectoral capacity. Unavoidably, unforeseen complications emerge when systems are strengthened or changed. These complications can be discovered only by working in line with anticipated systems, and resolving challenges in line. The system is sustainable when it has been operating long enough for each step in the process to become standard and routine.
The focus for each of the activities outlined above is on realizing systems that produce ever-improving DRM outcomes in some of the world’s most hazard-prone nations. Capacity building is a long-term effort in this context, but a catalytic approach ensures that local capacity is enhanced and not replaced or displaced.
a. Scholarships are more effective at the individual level and centers of excellence are more effective at the national level, but G2G has proven to be most effective overall. See Lansang and Dennis (2004).