Innovations in Earth Observation over the Coming Decade 
The resolution and availability of earth observation satellites are much greater now than they were a decade ago. It is still the case, however, that the use of satellite-based EO in DRM is constrained by the lack of observations for risk-prone areas.  
Space agencies are addressing this issue by putting in place new data policies that will soon provide users with open and free access to agencies’ archives of images from the past 10 years, starting with SPOT images. They are also developing complementary plans of observation. Two upcoming satellite missions—Sentinel-1 and Sentinel-2, jointly developed by the European Commission and the European Space Agency and scheduled to launch in spring 2014—will make high-quality SAR and multispectral data freely available to end-users.
The SAR data generated by Sentinel-1 can be used for global, national, and local hazard assessments. The multispectral Sentinel-2 mission—for global land observation at high resolution with high-revisit capability—will provide enhanced continuity of data so far provided by SPOT-5 and Landsat 7 and 8 and will offer data comparable to those provided by the U.S. Landsat system. With a constellation of two operational satellites allowing a five-day geometric revisit time, Sentinel-2 will provide systematic coverage of the overall land surface. Other EO missions that will greatly enhance global observations for DRM applications include the ALOS-2 mission of JAXA (Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency) and the Canadian Radarsat Constellation Mission (RCM). Two new U.S. commercial optical satellites, Skybox and PlanetLab, will become available in the near future and will greatly enhance the accessibility of these high-resolution images.  
In complement to the systematic and frequent coverage over wide areas made available by EO missions, detailed and up-to-date observations are being provided through very high-resolution systems operated by commercial players and national space agencies. Relevant missions are the Pléiades mission of CNES (France’s National Center for Space Studies) and Astrium Geo-Information Services; Cosmo-Skymed of ASI (Italian Space Agency) and e-geos; TerraSAR/Tandem-X of DLR (German Aerospace Center) and Astrium Geo-Information Services; and Radarsat-2 of CSA (Canadian Space Agency) and MDA Corporation. 