## 3-5. International Collaboration of Space Agencies to Support Disaster Risk Management Using Satellite Earth Observation<sup>32</sup>
 
*/Philippe Bally (European Space Agency), Ivan Petiteville (European Space Agency, CEOS Disasters Working Group), Andrew Eddy (Athena Global), Francesco Gaetani (Group on Earth Observations Secretariat), Chu Ishida (Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency), Steven Hosford (Centre National d’Etudes Spatiales), Stuart Frye (NASA), Kerry Sawyer (CEOS), Guy Seguin (International Space Consultant)/*

Working together in groups such as the Committee on Earth Observation Satellites (CEOS), national space agencies are seeking to coordinate their efforts and resources to make large volumes of earth observation (EO) data available for use in risk management and disaster reduction. EO data are currently used operationally in the context of disaster response by the International Charter (see box 3-2). 
 
The EO data come in various forms—medium- and high-resolution optical data; medium- and high-resolution microwave radar data (C, L, and X band); interferometric SAR (synthetic aperture radar) data products; infrared and thermal data; and meteorological data sets—and can serve as the basis of regular, detailed updates on the status of hazards globally, regionally, or nationally. Currently, much EO data complements ground data, but where in situ information is limited, EO data may be the only source of information available. 

EO data can be instrumental in risk assessment and disaster reduction. These data can be used for a range of applications, such as mapping hazards, evaluating asset exposure, and modelling vulnerability: 

+ .__Basic mapping__. Nearly all the mapping services provided by satellite EO to DRM and humanitarian aid projects are underpinned by basic mapping. This base-layer information serves as a standardized geographical reference data set that can be used to determine key geographical attributes of a given area. 
+ .__Asset mapping__. Asset mapping provides up-to-date, synoptic, and objective infrastructure information concerning the asset at risk. It can also add to and improve knowledge about the potential impact of natural hazards in areas at risk. 
+ .__Urban mapping__. This service assesses the structure of the built-up areas. In agglomerations where urban expansion is progressing very rapidly and the territorial conditions are extremely constrained, EO data help to create easily updatable baseline maps of urban assets while taking into account location of informal settlements and their high vulnerability to natural hazards such as floods and landslides.
+ .__Remote assessment of damage__. This service uses processed satellite data from before and after a disaster to provide crisis mapping, situation mapping, and damage assessment for on-the-ground disaster response by governments, first responders, and planners of resilient recovery.
+ .__Flood risk analysis__. This service provides information to support risk management and water resources management. Depending on input data and methodologies used, different types of information can be extracted, such as the classified distribution of the land cover and socioeconomic units in areas at risk, or hazard damage information based on measurements of water depth and/or flow velocity. 
+ .__Precise terrain deformation mapping__. This service contributes to geohazard risk assessment to support mitigation, prevention, and preparedness. For a wide range of risk assessments, including those concerned with flood, seismic hazard, and climate change, terrain-motion information has direct relevance.  
+ .__Landslide inventories and landslide monitoring__. These services provide hazard mapping information in landslide-prone areas and carry out repeat observations over large areas. (Locally, emergency monitoring of hot spots typically is performed using ground-based radar as the primary source).

CEOS has developed a long-term vision for how it can expand its contributions to all phases of DRM. It anticipates contributions that are global in scope, even as they build on strong partnerships at local, national, or regional levels; that are user driven; that address several hazard types; and that take into account all relevant EO-based capabilities available or under development. As part of this vision, and to demonstrate the benefits of EO data used in complement to more conventional data sources, CEOS is implementing pilots defined with representatives of the user community (scientists, civil protection agencies, local resources management authorities, etc.) for floods, seismic hazards, and volcanoes in 2014–2016.

Looking at the tremendous resources of new EO missions—some innovations are described in box 3-3—and the volume of service delivery by current projects in DRM, users could consider how such volumes of data might be better exploited. Existing use for risk assessment and disaster preparedness remains embryonic, despite evident potential. Further investment may be required to support new user communities and emerging partnerships. Looking at efforts to reduce disaster risk, existing services have proved useful and have demonstrated the cost benefit of providing risk assessment based on satellite EO data. For some geo-information needs, additional research and development is required. For other needs the available products are mature, precise, and documented. However, currently it appears that the main obstacle to progress remains lack of awareness of what exists and what can be accomplished.
