## 3-2. Open Cities: Application of the Open Data for Resilience Initiative in South Asia and the Lessons Learned<sup>22</sup>

*/Robert Soden, Nama Raj Budhathoki, Marc Forni (World Bank); Vivien Deparday (GFDRR)/*

South Asia is one of the most rapidly urbanizing regions in the world. Growing populations, unplanned settlements, and unsafe building practices all increase disaster risk in the region. As urban populations and vulnerability grow, promoting urban growth that is resilient to natural hazards and the impacts of climate change becomes an ever-greater challenge. 

The Open Cities project constitutes one effort to meet this challenge. Launched by the World Bank and the GFDRR in November 2012, it aims to create open data ecosystems that will facilitate data-driven urban planning and DRM in South Asian cities and builds on the practices and tools developed under OpenDRI. Open Cities has brought together stakeholders from government, donor agencies, the private sector, universities, and civil society groups to create usable information through community mapping, build applications and tools to inform decision making, and develop the networks of trust and social capital necessary for these efforts to become sustainable. This process has been evolutionary, with opportunities for experimentation, learning, failure, and adaptation incorporated into the project planning.

Open Cities approaches risk assessment differently from catastrophic risk modelling firms, whose data are typically used by the insurance industry or for specific portfolio analysis. Professional assessments often involve computationally intensive modelling analysis, but they also tend to rely on statistical representations, proxies, or estimations of the exposed assets, which are expressed in monetary terms. These data are insufficient for driving specific investments to reduce disaster risk, because individual assets are typically not accurately located, described, and valued. By contrast, the Open Cities platform engages local expertise and stakeholders in identifying all building structures in a city and assigning vulnerability attributes to each. In this way, a risk assessment that identifies particular structures at risk can be completed. An assessment with this degree of precision is able to identify structures based on importance and risk level, and can therefore guide plans to reduce disaster and climate risk through physical investments. 

///Drawing upon experiences from Haiti and Indonesia./// Open Cities was inspired by two other projects involving community mapping, the OpenStreetMap response to the 2010 Haiti earthquake (described in section 3-3) and the Community Mapping for Exposure effort by the Australian and Indonesian governments (described below in section 3-4). Like these efforts, Open Cities made use of the OSM platform to harness the power of crowd and community to create accurate and up-to-date spatial data about the location and characteristics of the built and natural environments. 

Using lessons learned from these projects in Haiti and Indonesia, Open Cities employs a scalable approach to understanding urban challenges and disaster risk in South Asian cities. Three cities were chosen for the initial work: Batticaloa, Sri Lanka; Dhaka, Bangladesh; and Kathmandu, Nepal. These cities were chosen for their high levels of disaster risk, the presence of World Bank activities related to urban planning and disaster management that would benefit from access to better data, and the willingness of government counterparts to participate in, and help guide, the interventions. Open Cities has sought to support the creation of new data in each of these projects, but has also supported broader ecosystems of open data production and use in the three cities. Leveraging data to improve urban planning and DRM decisions requires not just high-quality information, but also the requisite tools, skills, and willingness to commit to a data-driven decision-making process. With this in mind, Open Cities also sought to develop partnerships across government ministries, donor agencies, universities, private sector technology groups, and civil society organizations to ensure broad acceptance of the data produced, facilitate data usage, and align investments in risk reduction across projects and sectors. With the first phase of Open Cities complete in each of the projects, these partnerships will be critical for continuing the work and expanding into new cities in the region.

///Case study: Batticaloa, Sri Lanka./// Batticaloa, a major city in Sri Lanka’s Eastern Province severely affected by the Sri Lankan civil war and the 2004 Indian Ocean tsunami, is located in a hazard-prone area that has suffered near-annual droughts, floods, and cyclones. Some limited hazard maps were available for the area, but no detailed digital geographic data of the built environment were available for use in risk studies or for informing potential infrastructure and risk mitigation projects. To fill this gap, Open Cities started a pilot project to map the building stock, including critical assets of the Manmunai North Divisional Secretariat, which covers an area of 68km<sup>2</sup> and includes about 90,000 people around the town of Batticaloa. The work began with a series of meetings with the Batticaloa local authorities. In part, these were designed to establish the close collaboration needed to carry out the actual mapping. But they were also meant to ensure local understanding of and trust in the mapping process and in the data produced, so as to encourage local authorities to use the tools and data for their own DRM and urban planning projects.

A team of four technical experts (three recent GIS and IT graduates and one experienced GIS analyst) was hired and trained in OSM techniques in order to supervise and support the overall mapping process. Team members worked directly with the staff from local partners, including the Batticaloa Municipal Council, the Batticaloa District, the Manmunai North Divisional Secretariat, and the 48 Grama Niladhari that make up the Manmunai North Divisional Secretariat. A small group began by tracing all building outlines into OSM using satellite imagery and then added landmarks, roads and road names, and points of interests using local paper maps provided by the divisional secretariat. This effort created a solid reference map for the surveying work. The work was then split into two components: buildings were surveyed by 48 recent graduates hired to work on the Grama Niladhari local planning and development, and surveyed data were entered by government workers who were also responsible for fixing the maps and refining the point of interests. Both groups were trained in OSM and surveying techniques by the Open Cities team, and all the staff involved in the data collection received a stipend for the extra work. 

Data on basic characteristics (number of floors, usage, and construction materials of walls and roof) were collected for all 30,000 buildings in the area. These data are now freely available in OSM and in the government geospatial data-sharing platform RiskInfo (www.riskinfo.lk) for easy use by many stakeholders. To publicize the benefits of these techniques at the national level and promote their adoption, high-level managers of the relevant national agencies were briefed regularly and given final results when available. Two week-long training courses, one dealing with OSM techniques and the other with use of data for decision making (specifically the combination of data with existing hazard maps through GIS tools and the InaSAFE tool) were conducted at the national level with all relevant national agencies. Discussions are ongoing with various ministries concerning the next phase of the project. There is a strong interest in scaling up the project to cover a greater geographic area and in streamlining the use of the data in more DRM applications and sectors.

///Case study: Dhaka, Bangladesh./// Dhaka's Old City is a crowded and complex area of immense historical value and an important locus of social and economic activity. In consultation with Dhaka Water and Sanitation, seismic risk experts from Bangladesh University of Engineering and Technology (BUET), and a local nongovernmental organization (NGO) working on heritage preservation and restoration in Old Dhaka, the Dhaka Open Cities pilot sought to create detailed maps of three of the Old City's 15 wards. These maps would provide data useful for planning evacuation routes, managing water and sanitation infrastructure, and understanding the location and characteristics of heritage buildings. In partnership with BUET, which provided technical support and a working space, 20 engineering and planning undergraduates were hired as mappers and were trained in a series of workshops over a three-month period. A local nonprofit GIS consulting organization, CEGIS, was contracted with to provide management and quality control for the work. The Humanitarian OpenStreetMap Team (HOT), a nonprofit specializing in the use of OpenStreetMap in development and humanitarian relief situations, also provided training and technical oversight to the project.

The effort began by importing building footprint data for the three wards—created by CEGIS as part of a different project but until that point unavailable to the public—directly into OSM. This allowed the mapping team to focus on field surveying, in which basic characteristics, such as building height, usage, construction materials, and age were collected through visual survey of each building. The team also mapped road characteristics (width and surface type) along with important water and sanitation infrastructure. The data were added to OSM during times when conditions prohibited field surveys (e.g., poor weather conditions). Two weeks of training at the beginning of the project and a final two weeks of data entry and quality assessment at the end of the project left two months in the middle for fieldwork. During this period, the team was able to finish complete maps of the three wards. 

In total, 8,500 buildings, 540 of which were deemed to have historical significance, were surveyed. Sections of roads measuring 43km and drainage works measuring over 50km were also assessed. This information is now available to the public through the OSM platform. Several training courses and presentations on OSM were also given to university students, government partners, and private sector technology companies during the project period in order to help the OSM community in Dhaka grow. The results of the pilot were presented to the government and other key stakeholders in December 2013. Consultations are ongoing concerning the next phase of the project.

///Case study: Kathmandu, Nepal./// Kathmandu, the capital city of Nepal, has very high potential for significant loss of human life during a major earthquake event.<sup>23</sup> In November 2012, in partnership with the government of Nepal, the World Bank and GFDRR launched a project to build seismic resilience in the Kathmandu Valley’s education and health infrastructure, in part by creating a disaster risk model to determine the relative vulnerability of the relevant buildings. Once complete, the model will be used to prioritize plans for retrofits of schools and health facilities to improve structural integrity in the face of earthquake. However, a critical input into this model is building-related exposure data.

World Bank staff and consultants began the year-long project by assembling a team of mappers and community mobilizers. The team was responsible for a variety of tasks, from field surveying to software development to training of community groups in OSM. The core team comprised six graduates of Kathmandu University who were recruited based on their prior contribution to Nepal’s then-nascent OSM community. They were paid full-time salaries at rates commensurate with the local salary structure for recent graduates in technical disciplines. The project also recruited six part-time interns from Kathmandu University and 11 volunteers from Tribhuvan University. Office space for the team provided access to meeting rooms, reliable Internet service, and opportunities to interact with other technologists and entrepreneurs, some of whom later became active in OpenStreetMap.

Open Cities Kathmandu surveyed 2,256 schools and 350 health facilities in the Kathmandu Valley. In addition to collecting a comprehensive list of structural data for health and school facilities, the team worked to create a comprehensive base map of the valley by digitizing building footprints, mapping the road network, and collecting information on other major points of interest. The Open Cities team also conducted significant outreach to universities, technical communities, and government in order to expand the OSM community. Over 2,300 individuals participated in OSM trainings or presentations during the first year of the project. The data have been used in plans to retrofit school and health facilities and in applications for transportation planning; moreover, the U.S. Agency for International Development (USAID) has incorporated the data into disaster preparedness planning exercises. The American Red Cross has also made substantial contributions to the OSM project in Kathmandu, suggesting the opportunities for partnerships between development organizations. A local NGO called the Kathmandu Living Labs, staffed by participants in the first phase of the Open Cities project, has been created in order to continue the work.

Lessons learned and recommendations. Although the Open Cities project is ongoing, several key lessons have already emerged that can be applied to other initiatives. 

1. .///Government ownership is important.///
Although many Open Cities partners and participants will be from civil society and the private sector, government counterparts in line ministries must be involved in projects’ development and execution. Engaging governments early in the planning process and ensuring close involvement throughout is an essential component of a successful Open Cities project. Governments are primary stakeholders for many DRM and urban planning projects and provide necessary legitimacy to Open Cities work. In Kathmandu, the involvement of the Department of Education in the mapping work will be critical for developing the department’s confidence in and use of the data to prioritize seismic retrofitting activities. An official letter in support of the project carried by mapping team members helped them gain the access to schools and health facilities that was needed for conducting their assessments. In Sri Lanka, the project deliberately involved local authorities directly in the mapping activities as a way to ensure government ownership of the project and the use of the data in various applications. 
2. .///Universities make good partners.///
Universities have been valuable allies during the first year of Open Cities work. Outreach to university departments of engineering, geography, computer science, and planning has provided projects with critical connections and support. In Dhaka and Kathmandu, university students have played an important role in mapping activities and software development. Students from technical departments tend to learn OSM quickly, and some students in Kathmandu fulfilled a requirement to complete internships or volunteer projects through participating in Open Cities. University faculty have also provided useful support. In Dhaka, professors from the BUET Civil Engineering Department and Planning Department contributed to the design of the mapping project. Professors in the Geomatics Department at Kathmandu University provided guidance to the project on quality control techniques for surveying, and they also incorporated OSM into their courses. Training future classes of university students will help the OSM community in Kathmandu continue to grow after the formal project period has ended. 
3. .///Access to imagery is critical.///
As the work of Haiti’s OSM community made clear, access to high-resolution satellite imagery is extremely useful for efficient mapping of infrastructure. However, such imagery is often prohibitively expensive or available only under licenses that prohibit digitization by the public. With this in mind, the U.S. State Department's Humanitarian Information Unit launched an initiative in 2012 called Imagery to the Crowd, which makes high-resolution imagery owned by the U.S. government accessible to humanitarian organizations and the volunteer communities that support them. Open Cities Kathmandu partnered with USAID and Imagery to the Crowd to release 2012 satellite photography for the Kathmandu Valley and to organize volunteers in Nepal, the United Kingdom, Germany, and the United States to digitize building footprints. The data created by these volunteers have been incorporated into USAID disaster response planning, and they provided a solid foundation upon which the Nepali OSM community can continue to expand and improve. 
4. .///Data must be trustworthy and credible.///
Data quality is a frequently raised issue in community and volunteer mapping projects. Numerous measures were taken by the Open Cities project to ensure that partners and intended users of the data would trust the data’s accuracy and completeness. In Kathmandu, partner organizations—including the National Society for Earthquake Technology, a respected NGO working on seismic resilience, and the Kathmandu University Geomatics Department—provided technical guidance to the project as well as independent quality assessments throughout the process to provide credibility. In Dhaka, key stakeholders, including BUET and representatives of government and civil society, were consulted throughout the project, and many were given basic training in OSM in order to familiarize them with the platform.  
5. .///Sustained engagement is required for success.///
For these projects to be successful, sustained engagement with local partners is necessary. Too often technology and data projects of this sort are discrete and short-term endeavors. A workshop or a weeklong training course is simply not enough time to trigger the kinds of change that Open Cities hopes to support. Although OSM makes mapping more accessible to nonspecialists, collecting and interacting with geographic information remains a complex technical undertaking, one that requires more training and involves a longer learning process than is often assumed. It also takes time to build technical communities of OSM mappers and software developers who are familiar enough with the platform to comfortably deploy it in their own tools and applications—and creating these communities is an important part of sustaining Open Cities projects. Finally, Open Cities seeks to contribute to cultural and policy shifts within technical groups and government that will prioritize open data and broad participation in development challenges. When projects of this kind are planned, the parties involved must understand and commit to sustained investment in their success. <br  />In its early phase, Open Cities has demonstrated success in engaging nontraditional institutions and community groups in the process of creating high-resolution spatial data that can be used in support of urban planning and resilience-building programs. There is still work to be done to establish direct links between the OSM data set and target users in and out of government, but the initial reception has been positive, and there is strong interest from a number of other development institutions in learning from the early experience and in partnering on future work. In the future, Open Cities will also seek to scale through expansion of the range of organizations involved in the work and explore launching new programs in cities in South Asia and other regions. 
