## 3-8. Global Water-related Disaster Risk Indicators Assessing Real Phenomena of Flood Disasters: Think Locally, Act Globally

*/Toshio Okazumi, Sangeun Lee, Youngjoo Kwak, Gusyev Maksym, Daisuke Kuribayashi, Nario Yasuda, Hisaya Sawano (International Centre for Water Hazard and Risk Management)/*

Water-related disasters, including both flood and drought, continue to pose threats globally. Although preventive strategies have been devised to address this risk, especially in the years since the Hyogo Framework for Action (HFA), important steps still need to be taken to guide DRM. 

Water-related risk assessments do exist, but none is without limitations. Credible water-related disaster risk indicators need to meet five particular challenges (ICHARM 2013): 

1.	.///They must represent the real phenomena///. Categorizing data and proxies on an ordinal scale creates indicators that lack transparency and physical meaning.
2.	.///They must evaluate flood hazard in terms of the frequency and intensity of the physical phenomenon///. Hazard assessments that examine the frequency of occurrence of flood events often do not highlight the potential intensity and therefore potential impact of the event. 
3.	.///They must take into account the effectiveness of water infrastructure///. Global-scale hydrological models generally ignore the effectiveness of dams, reservoirs, levees, etc. This practice produces inaccurate indicators and fails to emphasize governments’ efforts to protect people from floods. (This issue is further discussed in section 3-23.
4.	.///They must use meaningful proxies for vulnerability///. Using poverty-related proxies such as GDP per capita or a national wealth index to represent vulnerability assumes a clear relationship between poverty and flood risk, though one has not been established. Nor does this approach provide guidance on how to protect people from flood disasters (Wisner et al. 2004).
5.	.///They must clearly identify risk hot spots///. Identifying large target areas is insufficient because affected people and fatalities may be concentrated in risk hot spots that are small fractions of the target area.

The discussion below focuses on the third issue, concerning the inclusion of water infrastructure in regional or national flood risk assessments, using three case studies. All three river basins discussed are heavily populated, located in or near capital cities, and suffer frequent floods from tropical cyclones and typhoons. Table 3-1 summarizes the overall characteristics of the three river basins. 

In the delta area of the Pampanga River, the flow capacity is so small that even low river discharges, such as those of floods with a five-year return period, can cause flooding. Over the whole river basin, floods happen almost every year. 
In the Chao Phraya River basin, four tropical cyclones and Typhoon Nesat in 2011 caused floods that broke levees at 20 locations. For the period from July to November 2011, flooding damaged industrial parks and affected residents’ livelihoods over large areas inside and outside Bangkok. 

The Tone River basin experienced tremendous damage from Typhoon Kathleen in 1947. After this event, the Japanese government strived to improve levees and construct dams and retarding basins. Although middle-sized discharges are common, they have not been a serious threat to the mainstream river, but the tributaries often experience floods. Nevertheless, large floods (those with a 100-year or greater return period) are anticipated to pose a significant threat to the social and economic systems, given the area’s high population density and many links with domestic and overseas industries. Impacts of these historical floods in the three river basins are summarized in table 3-2.

///Hazard assessment///. To assess the flood hazard, we utilized a simplified modelling technology to produce flood inundation depth (Kwak et al. 2012) based on flood river discharge simulated with the distributed hydrologic Block-wise TOP (BTOP) model (Takeuchi, Ao, Ishidaira 1999). Using global data sets, this enabled us to apply a standard hazard assessment methodology to various river basins in different countries for inundations associated with a selected return period such as a 50-year flood. This approach had a number of advantages:

+ .Data sets used (for precipitation, temperature, topography, soils, land use, etc.) were globally available.
+ .Visual comparisons of 1-in-50 year flood events and historical flood inundation maps were possible. 
+ .Consideration of dam effectiveness made it possible to account for individual dams’ flood control capacity, which in turn made it possible to reduce the 50-year flood discharge. 
+ .It was possible to consider levee effectiveness when calculating overflow water level (the overflow water level is calculated as the difference between the flood water level of the 50-year flood discharge and the bankfull water level) and inundation depth for each grid globally.<sup>39</sup>

This hazard assessment calculated changes in inundation with and without water infrastructure such as dams and levees; see figure 3-8. The inundation changes due to dams with flood control capacity are shown in panel a for the Pampanga River basin and panel b for the Chao Phraya River basin; inundation changes due to levees are shown in panel c for the Tone River basin. 

In the Pampanga River basin (panel a), the Pantabangan Dam makes a large change to inundation in its downstream area (see the enlarged area in panel a). In the Chao Phraya River basin (panel b), three dams have very large flood control capacities and reduce the inundation. In the Tone River basin (panel c), the water infrastructure does not affect the headwaters but creates drastic changes in the downstream area. This dramatic inundation change can be explained by the comprehensiveness of the water infrastructure, including super-levees designed to protect the highly populated Tokyo Metropolitan area.

Table 3-3 presents the respective values of flood inundation area change in the three river basins considering water infrastructure. The projected flood inundation area due to a 50-year discharge decreases in response to both types of infrastructure (dam and levee). Above all, the Tone River basin case is noticeable, in that the reduction is as high as 86 percent owing to the effect of levees. 

To assess flood exposure, we assumed a critical inundation depth of 0.1m in view of the minimum resolution of topographical data and models. We used the Global Population Database of LandScanTM as a digital population map in order to estimate potentially affected people, i.e., population at grid cells where 50-year floods are likely to cause inundations beyond the critical level.

Table 3-4 shows the respective values of flood exposure change considering water infrastructure. The number of affected people decreases in response to both dams and levees. The dams’ flood control capacity in the Pampanga River basin resulted in a small decrease in flood inundation depths and areas, implying a 6 percent decrease in the number of affected people. The decrease in affected people was much more noticeable in the zone managed by the Pantabangan Dam (see the enlarged areas figure 3-8, panel a). The number of affected people was reduced by about 30 percent. Dams in the Chao Phraya River basin could moderately decrease flood inundation depths and areas, implying a 48 percent decrease in the number of affected people. In the Tone River basin, levee infrastructure has the potential to significantly decrease inundation depths, implying a sharp decrease—88 percent—in the number of affected people.

This analysis has clearly shown the importance of including water infrastructure in a flood risk assessment. Global and regional flood analysis that fails to consider water infrastructure should be treated with caution, as this type of analysis will inevitably result in an overestimation of both the flood extent and impact to communities.
