## 3-7. Global Probabilistic Risk Assessment: A Key Input into Analysis for the 2013 and 2015 Global Assessment Reports 

*/Manuela Di Mauro (Risk Knowledge Section, United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction)/*

The Global Assessment Report on Disaster Risk Reduction (GAR) is the UN flagship publication on global disaster risk and disaster risk management. Building on the UNDP (2004) report on global risk patterns and trends and on the World Bank’s report on natural disaster hot spots throughout the world (Arnold et al. 2005), the GAR has been produced every two years since 2009 by the UN Office for Disaster Risk Reduction (UNISDR). Each report is based on original research and a global assessment of risk from natural hazards. Since 2013, this GAR global risk assessment has been carried out following a fully probabilistic approach applied at global scale (UNISDR 2013a). The research carried out for the 2013 assessment (UNISDR 2013b) and for the 2015 assessment involved contributions from world-leading institutions.<sup>33</sup> From this research, original data have been produced, new hazard models have been built, and existing hazard and risk modelling tools have been upgraded, with all outputs peer-reviewed. 

__Rationale for the probabilistic approach to risk assessment__. The 2009 and 2011 GAR took an historical approach to risk assessment. Researchers looked at hazardous events and their consequences over the last 30 years and derived exposure and vulnerability parameters (UNISDR 2009; UNISDR 2011). They then used these parameters to estimate losses for any given year from 1970 to 2010. These results were then used to produce a proxy of current risk and past trends by region. The main strength of this model was its capacity to reveal and measure underlying risk factors and drivers. This approach, however, had significant limitations; the short historical record used meant that temporal and spatial information was limited, and records of consequences lacked detail.

A probabilistic approach minimizes these limitations. It uses historical events, expert knowledge, and theory to simulate events that can physically occur but are not represented in the historical record over the past few decades. A probabilistic approach can generate a catalog of all possible events, the probability of occurrence of each event, and their associated losses. For these reasons, a probabilistic risk assessment approach was used for GAR13, which began development in late 2011, and it is being further developed for GAR15. This approach delivers a number of key outputs:

+ .Global stochastic hazard catalogs of earthquakes and tropical cyclones that include their spatial, temporal, and intensity characteristics, and their associated losses
+ .Regional probabilistic models for riverine flood and agricultural drought
+ .A global exposure database
+ .Loss exceedance curves for each hazard at the country level, which provide an estimation of the average annual loss (AAL) and the probable maximum loss (PML) for a given return period 

The flood, earthquake, and tropical cyclone risk assessments were carried out using the CAPRA risk modelling suite (www.ecapra.org).

///Applications of the global risk model results///. The aim of the GAR global risk assessment is to produce an order of magnitude of the risk at global scale as a basis for advocating for investments in disaster risk reduction. Thus the GAR global risk assessment’s results should not be downscaled to a local level and do not render other types of risk assessments unnecessary. Instead, the GAR global risk assessment advocates for national and subnational risk assessments using consistent approaches and highlighting estimates of hazard, exposure, and risk at national level. 

The results from the GAR global risk modelling have a variety of uses:

+ .They can be used by government officials and ministries as evidence to support the funding of higher-resolution risk assessments and can encourage countries to optimize their disaster risk management portfolios.
+ .For governments engaged in transboundary and regional partnerships implying mutual support and collaboration in case of disasters (e.g., ASEAN), they can be used to provide an overview of the risk levels of the partner countries.
+ .They can show international organizations (international financing institutions, the UN, NGOs, etc.) how disasters are likely to affect different countries, and can thus form the basis for strategic definition, programmatic prioritization and planning, budgeting, etc.
+ .They can be used by investors to gain an understanding of the overall level of risk, and thus the potential losses, that a country faces from specific hazards. They can be a means of encouraging investors to perform detailed risk analysis, to budget for DRM as part of their investment planning, and to work with governments to reduce the risk for the country in which they plan to invest.
+ .For organizations representing small and medium enterprises (the commercial entities that are usually most affected by disasters), results can offer a broad estimation of how major hazards would translate into direct losses. This information can in turn encourage businesses to assess their particular risk and governments to adopt DRM strategies.

///The Global Exposure Database///. The Global Exposure Database (GED)—with a 5km x 5km cell resolution (figure 3-7)—was developed for GAR13 by CIMNE and Associates and United Nations Environment Programme–Global Resource Information Database (UNEP-GRID). The GED includes the economic value and number of residents in dwellings, commercial and industrial buildings, and hospitals and schools in urban agglomerations (De Bono 2013). The physical areas were defined using an urban mask based on MODIS land cover (Schneider, Friedl, and Potere 2009) and were divided into rural, minor urban, and major urban areas. Population in urban areas was extracted from LandScanTM (ORNL 2007). Building classes and percentages for each country were derived from various sources, including the World Housing Encyclopedia, detailed in WAPMERR (2013). The economic value was calculated through analysis of income levels and education levels, with downscaled nationally produced capital based on a gross domestic product (GPD) proxy. Further details of the exposure analysis are in De Bono (2013); WAPMERR (2013); and CIMNE et al. (2013).

For the 2015 release, the GED will be enhanced to enable inclusion of other initiatives, such as GED4GEM (see box 2-5 and section 3-6 for more information), as well as future population distribution models, a building-type pilot study, and critical facilities, should these become available at a later stage. Additional improvements for 2015 include the following:

+ .The ability to account for both urban and rural populations and buildings when calculating human and economic losses. This will involve new geospatial layers defining urban areas, such as the global built-up area layer developed by the European Union Joint Research Centre.
+ .The flexibility to replace the LandScanTM data with gridded population supplied by an alternative source. This makes it possible to avoid any constraints to data distribution linked to proprietary licenses.
+ .Inclusion of socioeconomic parameters, based on income, employment, etc., to the most detailed level possible from subnational data. 
+ .A downscaled 1km x 1km GED in coastal areas for the calculation of tsunami risk and the integration of storm surges in the tropical cyclone risk assessment.
+ .Improvements in the building class distribution at national level and for large countries (e.g., China and United States) to subnational levels (e.g., administrative level 1).
+ .System performance improvements in functions and algorithms that will support the increased data volume.

///Earthquake///. For GAR13, the stochastic earthquake event set (location, depth, frequency, and magnitude) was built considering principal seismic sources, tectonic regions and seismic provinces, and historical earthquakes from the U.S. Geological Survey National Earthquake Information Center catalog. Analysis was undertaken using the CRISIS 2012 earthquake modelling software (Ordaz et al. 2012; CIMNE et al. 2013), which is compatible with the CAPRA modelling suite. The results are expressed in terms of ground shaking (spectral acceleration) in a 5km x 5km grid for each event. The combination of the modelled losses for each building class in each cell of the exposure grid is used to calculate the seismic risk for the cell.

For the 2015 GAR global risk assessment, the earthquake model will be improved using the products developed by the GEM foundation, including the new set of ground motion prediction equations and the new historical seismicity catalog; for more detail on these products, see section 3-6.

///Tropical cyclone///. GAR13 assessed tropical cyclone risk using stochastic cyclone tracks generated from historical track information from the IBTrACS database of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA). The track information was integrated with data on global topography (derived from NOAA) and terrain roughness (derived by integrating European Space Agency GlobCover and Socioeconomic Data and Applications Center data sets) to estimate surface-level winds over land using the hurricane model of CAPRA (CIMNE et al. 2013).

The tropical cyclone risk model for GAR13 did not consider storm surge, even though this can contribute substantially to the losses caused by this hazard (as Typhoon Haiyan in the Philippines in 2013 made clear). Storm surge will therefore be included in global risk assessment for GAR15. GAR15 will also aim to implement improvements in tropical cyclone modelling highlighted in a peer-review process lead by the World Meteorological Organization.

///Riverine flood///. A new, fully probabilistic Global Flood Model was developed for GAR15 by the CIMA Foundation and UNEP-GRID.  

The GAR13 flood model calculated flood discharges associated with different return periods for each of the world’s major river basins, based on flood discharge statistics from 7,552 gauging stations worldwide. Where time series of flow discharges were too short or incomplete, they were improved with proxy data from stations located in the same “homogeneous region.” Homogeneous regions were calculated taking into account information such as climatic zones, hydrological characteristics of the catchments, and statistical parameters of the streamflow data. The calculated probabilistic discharges were introduced to river sections, whose geometries were derived from topographic data, and used with a simplified approach (based on Manning’s equation) to model water levels downstream.<sup>34</sup>

Improvements in the 2015 release include the following:

+ .Updates to the Global Streamflow database, and definition of new approaches to extracting hydrological and climatic information from the database
+ .Consideration of the influence of dams on the different streamflow conditions, with particular attention to extremes 
+ .Updates to the model’s regionalization through a reworking of the concept of homogeneous region with respect to more detailed metrics (e.g., reweighted area on the basis of rainfall volume contribution, seasonality, and time series variance)

///Tsunami hazard///. The global tsunami modelling carried out for GAR13 constituted a significant improvement to the first global-scale tsunami hazard and exposure assessment, carried out for GAR09. In comparison with the previous study, GAR13 provides a more complete coverage of tsunamigenic earthquake sources globally (developed by the Norwegian Geotechnical Institute and Geoscience Australia). 

The GAR13 model uses two methods, one based on scenario analysis and one based on a probabilistic method known as Probabilistic Tsunami Hazard Assessment (PTHA) (Burbidge et al. 2009). The first method now uses better input data and is applied for more sources than in the GAR09 model. The second method has been applied for the Indian Ocean and the southwest Pacific using research and analysis undertaken by Geoscience Australia (Cummins 2009; Thomas and Burbidge 2009). It calculates a set of synthetic earthquakes to obtain a distribution of possible run-up heights rather than using one scenario per location, and it allows for a robust determination of the return period. 

For GAR13, the tsunami hazard was calculated based on earthquakes with a 500-year return period—those earthquakes that are expected to contribute most significantly to tsunami risk. For GAR15, a fully probabilistic model will be developed through application of the PTHA method globally, in partnership with Geoscience Australia and the Norwegian Geotechnical Institute.

///Volcanic hazard///. The Global Volcano Model is working on an initial global assessment of probabilistic volcanic ash hazard, using an updated version of the model developed at the University of Bristol. The model employs stochastic simulation techniques, producing a large number of potential scenarios and their relative ash dispersal patterns (Jenkins et al. 2012a, 2012b). In addition, a regional-scale probabilistic volcanic ash hazard assessment is being undertaken using an innovative approach developed by Geoscience Australia. Building upon existing modelling methodologies (Bear-Crozier et al. 2012), this approach emulates hazard for ash-producing volcanoes in the Asia-Pacific.<sup>35</sup> A risk calculation using the CAPRA platform will also be piloted; this approach combines the probabilistic volcanic hazard results and vulnerability models developed by Geoscience Australia with exposure data from the GAR Global Exposure Database.

///Vulnerability functions///. The vulnerability functions used for the GAR13 global risk assessment are based on those developed for the U.S. Federal Emergency Management Agency’s Hazus-MH, also taking into account different resistant construction qualities and the level of countries’ development (which affects, for example, the completeness of and adherence to building codes). 
The next advance will be to improve the set of vulnerability functions that capture regional variations in construction practices. For GAR15, regional vulnerability curves will be adopted for East Asia, Oceania, and the Pacific Islands, through consultation with local experts lead by Geoscience Australia under its existing international development programs (Sengara et al. 2010, 2013; Bautista et al. 2012; Pacheco et al. 2013). 

///Risk assessment for earthquake, flood, and tropical cyclone///. For each building class associated with a grid point, the risk is calculated using CAPRA by assessing the damage caused by each of the modelled hazard events. 

Because the model considers different events, each grid point can be associated with a probability distribution of hazard intensity for certain return periods. As each point of the vulnerability curve is itself a probability distribution, a different probabilistic distribution of damages is calculated in each grid point for each event and for each building class. A distribution of losses is therefore calculated for each grid point, for each modelled event, and for each building class. 

This analysis produces an average annual loss metric, which estimates the loss likely every year due to a specific hazard. As the GAR global risk assessment is performed at global scale, the AAL assessed should be read as an order of magnitude estimate for the potential recurrent extent of losses in a country. The assessment also produces a probable maximum loss metric, which estimates the loss expected for long return periods—for example, 100, 200, or 500 years (depending on the hazard and the needs of the stakeholder). For GAR13, the return period of 250 years was used to assess the PML. This corresponds not to a loss that will happen once every 250 years, but to an event that has 0.4 percent chance of occurring in any year. 

It should be recognized that all results are uncertain. The uncertainty arises from assumptions and data sets used in the assessment of the exposed value, the simplifications necessary to model the hazards at global scale, and the use of vulnerability curves that are not country-specific. However, for the purposes of global-scale analysis and country-to-country comparisons, the level of uncertainty is considered acceptable. These results should thus be considered an initial step toward understanding the extent of disaster losses that a country might face and toward determining further actions, such as detailed country and subnational risk assessments.  

///Landslide hazard and risk///. Analysis in GAR09 showed that 55 percent of global mortality risk from landslides is concentrated in the Comoros, Dominica, Nepal, Guatemala, Papua New Guinea, the Solomon Islands, São Tomé and Príncipe, Indonesia, Ethiopia, and the Philippines. These countries also account for 80 percent of the exposure at risk of landslide (Peduzzi et al. 2009). The landslide susceptibility is a result of terrain slope, soil and geology type, soil moisture content (resulting from rainfall), and seismicity. Given the localized nature of this hazard, a probabilistic approach at a global scale is problematic; however, a number of case studies of countries highly prone to landslide were undertaken by the Norwegian Geotechnical Institute (NGI 2013).

Landslide risk in Indonesia and El Salvador was assessed in 2011 and 2013, respectively. The El Salvador model produced a detailed susceptibility analysis, which was overlaid by population distribution, to highlight high-risk areas. For 2015, the landslide hazard and risk will be calculated for high-risk countries such as Italy and the Philippines, and systematic improvements will be made in the analysis.

///Agricultural drought hazard and risk///. The GAR has used both deterministic and probabilistic approaches to analyze the complex phenomenon of agricultural drought.

The deterministic approach developed for GAR13 analyzed the Normalized Difference Vegetation Index, which is derived from 10 years of satellite imagery. This data set, which combines data on land use and agricultural information, provided a regional assessment of drought frequency. This methodology is useful in that it draws on easily available data and gives a general overview (Erian et al. 2012). Kenya and Somalia will feature as case studies in 2015.

An alternative approach undertakes probabilistic analysis of the relationship between crop losses and precipitation, temperature, and soil conditions. The technique is based on modelling the water content needed by the soil to sustain vegetation, which is done by representing the relationship between water requirement, evapotranspiration, rainfall (satellite derived), soil water-holding capacity, etc. The deficit in water content at critical times of the year (i.e., when germination occurs) and for prolonged periods of time translates into crop losses, which are also determined stochastically by relating known water deficits with data on crop losses. Once these relationships are established, it is possible to produce a synthetic time series of crop losses.

This stochastic water content event set was used to determine average annual crop losses and the probable maximum crop losses for different return periods (Jayanthi and Husak 2012). This probabilistic approach will be applied to other countries, possibly including different regions in Africa, and will be improved based on peer reviewers’ comments. Future work will also include climate change scenarios based on changes in seawater temperatures. 

To improve the transparency and the dissemination of the results, the GAR global risk assessment follows an open data policy. The results and data produced within the GAR global assessment reports are available for viewing and downloading at www.preventionweb.net/gar. 