## 3-16. Applying Multi-Hazard Risk Assessment to the Development of a Seismic Retrofit Program for Public Schools in Metro Manila, Philippines

*/H. Kit Miyamoto, Amir S. J. Gilani (Miyamoto International); Jolanta Kryspin-Watson, Artessa Saldivar-Sali, Abigail C. Baca (World Bank)/*

The Philippines is among the top global disaster hot spots, ranking 8th among countries most exposed to multiple hazards and 13th among those at high economic risk to natural disasters (Dilley et al. 2005b). Two events in 2013—the magnitude 7.2 Bohol earthquake on October 15 and Super Typhoon Yolanda on November 8—suggest the country’s particular vulnerability to earthquakes and typhoons. The Philippines is also vulnerable to nontropical cyclone precipitation, floods, volcanic activity, and tsunamis. These natural hazard events are harmful not only at the human level, but at the economic level; it is estimated that 85 percent of economic activity associated with national GDP occurs in at-risk areas (Dilley et al. 2005b). The need for a robust natural hazards risk reduction program is great.  

The National Capital Region, Metro Manila, is home to approximately 13 percent of the country’s population and generates 30 percent of its GDP. The PHIVOLCS, JICA, and MMDA (2004) Metro Manila Earthquake Impact Reduction study (the so-called MMEIRS study) estimated that 10 percent of the public schools in Metro Manila would incur heavy damage or collapse from a magnitude 7.2 West Valley Fault earthquake, endangering 210,000 students. This study also found that over 50 percent of the area’s public school buildings are at high risk from earthquakes. These estimates are expected to be updated by the findings of the Greater Metro Manila Area Risk Assessment Program (GMMA RAP) being led by the Philippine government (see section 3-4 for more information). Given that both population and built-up area have increased in Metro Manila during the past 10 years, the projected loss of life for a given scenario earthquake will likely increase significantly as well.

The World Bank’s partnership with the Philippines focuses on improving the resilience of public facilities to natural disasters by working with counterparts in the Department of Public Works and Highways, the Department of Education, the Department of Health, and other line agencies responsible for the construction and maintenance of critical infrastructure. While past projects successfully raised awareness of hazards and risk, the next step is to help the implementing agencies prioritize risk reduction investments given limited budget resources. Using existing hazard and risk assessment data, the current study—based on one component of the Safe and Resilient Infrastructure program—has sought to develop a prioritization methodology for seismic upgrading and retrofitting. Preliminary results from a pilot analysis in Metro Manila show that systematically strengthening and upgrading the most vulnerable public school buildings would greatly reduce the number of projected fatalities from a magnitude 7.2 scenario earthquake on the West Valley fault.

///Prioritization methodology for seismic upgrade of schools///. The prioritization method for determining which public school buildings were most in need of a seismic upgrade was based on the expected number of fatalities under the magnitude 7.2 scenario earthquake described in the MMEIRS study. The method took the status quo (no retrofit) as the baseline, and quantified both the benefits derived from and the costs associated with a seismic retrofit program. 

The number of fatalities associated with each school building was estimated using a probabilistic risk analysis platform. Both the direct cost components (structural upgrade and/or replacement) and indirect cost components (fatalities) were considered. In other words, the analysis considered both probable maximum loss and probable maximum death. The procedure used hazard, exposure, and building vulnerability as input parameters as follows:

+ .__Seismic hazard__. The seismic hazard data (earthquake intensity, proximity to earthquake fault, and soil condition at the site) were input as a layered map for analysis. Data were based on the provisions of the National Structural Code of the Philippines (ASEP 2010).
+ .__Exposure__. The Department of Education provided the project team with a database that lists the number of occupants (teachers, students, etc.) for the facilities under consideration. Field surveys were conducted and data from these surveys were used to augment and modify the database.
+ .__Building vulnerability__. The risk analysis platform provided fragility information for buildings of various types (for example, reinforced concrete moment frame) and vintages (for example, constructed prior to adoption of modern seismic codes). In this study, the recommended values of FEMA’s (2003) Hazus model were used and modified for Metro Manila.

Following evaluation, probabilistic estimates of structural damage to a given building were determined. These data were then used to obtain the following:

+ .__Damage functions__. Using fatality rates based on Hazus (modified for Metro Manila) and number of occupants, the number of fatalities for each building was estimated.
+ .__Cost estimates__. Using the structural damage data, and based on the buildings’ floor area and cost estimates obtained from local building contractors in Metro Manila, the cost (in 2013 U.S. dollars) for replacement as well as upgrade was obtained.
+ .__Aggregation__. Fatalities and upgrade costs were integrated to identify the optimal number of buildings to be selected for the first phase of seismic upgrade.

The prioritization procedure can be summarized as follows:

+ .The probability of the building experiencing any of the damage states was computed using the fragility functions corresponding to the building construction type, lateral load framing system, number of stories, and construction era. 
+ .The fatality ratio for each building was computed using the fatality rate for each damage state and the probability of exceeding that damage state.
+ .The number of fatalities for each building was computed using the fatality ratio and building occupancy. 
+ .The seismic upgrade cost for each building was computed using the cost estimate per square meter and the building floor area. 
+ .The fatalities and costs were aggregated for the 186 most vulnerable buildings.

The costs to replace and to upgrade schools were gathered from a survey of several Metro Manila contractors. A new or replacement school would cost approximately 25,000 pesos (US$580) per square meter. Upgrading, which includes earthquake strengthening and functional upgrades (for example, bathrooms), would cost approximately 5,200 to 11,000 pesos (US$120 to US$260) per square meter, depending on the number of stories and the site requirements.

///Key findings of school retrofit prioritization study./// Key findings of the prioritization study indicate that, because of the use of older seismic design codes or poor-quality detailing and/or construction, multistory reinforced concrete construction of the variety typically found in Metro Manila public schools is especially vulnerable to earthquake damage or collapse. The study further determined that if a 7.2 magnitude scenario earthquake event occurred in the daytime (while school was in session), it would result in an estimated 24,400 student deaths given the current student population in Metro Manila. Over 25 percent (6,385) of these fatalities would occur in only 5 percent (186) of the buildings, and 18 percent (4,320) would occur in the most vulnerable 100 buildings (3 percent) (see figure 3-21). By strengthening 40 percent (1,500) of the most vulnerable school buildings, potential student fatalities could be reduced by 80 percent (over 19,000 student lives saved). 

The corresponding cost analysis showed that the cost of strengthening and upgrading a typical school building is between 20 percent and 40 percent of the cost of new construction. Using the 20 percent figure, Metro Manila could strengthen and renovate five school buildings for the cost of one new building.
The Philippine Department of Public Works and Highways has made the decision to implement the cornerstone phase (retrofit of 200 school buildings) of the Safe and Resilient Infrastructure program in Metro Manila, with a view to eventual scale-up to other sectors (including lifeline infrastructure) and geographic locations as well as institutionalization of quality assurance systems. Using local construction cost estimates, the cost to strengthen the most dangerous 5 percent (186) of the vulnerable buildings is estimated to be between US$40 million and US$80 million (depending on the extent of functional upgrades).  

It should be noted that there were limitations in the exposure and hazard data that were available for the demonstration seismic prioritization analysis. When more accurate data become available, the prioritization should be refined to identify the highest-risk candidate buildings for strengthening. Factors other than those related to structural vulnerability (such as the need to replace certain schools to meet modern standards for educational delivery) should also be considered when developing the final prioritized list of buildings for upgrading. These factors will be incorporated through consultations with the Department of Education.

