## 3-3. Preliminary Survey of Government Engagement with Volunteered Geographic Information

*/Muki Haklay (University College London), Sofia Basiouka (National Technical University of Athens), Vyron Antoniou (Hellenic Military Geographical Service), Robert Soden (World Bank)/*

When data and information are shared and part of open systems, they promote transparency and accountability, and ensure that a wide range of actors can participate in the challenge of building resilience. Arguably, one of the greatest revolutions in this open data space has been the increasingly active involvement of local people in geospatial data collection and maintenance—a process known as volunteered geographic information (VGI).  

A preliminary survey of government engagement with VGI was undertaken in order to strengthen governmental projects that incorporate voluntary and crowdsourced data collection and to provide information that can support wider adoption of VGI. The survey compiles and distributes lessons learned and successful models from efforts by governments at different levels. The survey project began from the following premises: 

+ .Sources of VGI data such as OpenStreetMap are growing increasingly important across a range of thematic areas and user communities.
+ .Concerns about the quality, consistency, and completeness of VGI data have been assessed by a range of studies and overall have been found not serious enough to prevent exploration of VGI data as a valuable data source. 
+ .For governments, interacting with VGI communities is different and potentially more complex then interacting with typical sellers and resellers of GIS data.
+ .Designing strategies to encourage governments to engage with VGI efforts is not straightforward, and we are still learning from early experience what opportunities exist and what methodologies work well.

The survey project focuses on cases that demonstrate a synergy between government and citizens or civic society organizations. “Synergy” means a government authority’s clear use of contributed information to make decisions and take actions. Four case studies are highlighted: Canada’s interaction with OSM, Haiti’s interaction with the Humanitarian OSM Team, Indonesia’s experience with community mapping, and the U.S. State Department’s interaction with HOT.

///Canada./// In Canada, the main duty of National Mapping Agencies is to provide up-to-date topographical maps and a range of spatial products to public and private sector. Likewise, the role of the Mapping Information Branch at Natural Resources Canada is to provide accurate geographic information on landmass at the scale of 1:50,000. This task involves regularly covering an area of 10 million km2 divided into 13,200 map sheets. 

Taking into account the results of ongoing research regarding VGI quality, Canadian authorities choose to cooperate with the OSM community to see if and how the updating process could profit from the evolution of VGI. As Beaulieu, Begin, and Genest (2010) describe, the first step to this synergy was made by the Centre for Topographic Information in Sherbrooke, which released the digital topographic map of Canada in the native .osm format. This move enabled further integration of the Canadian authoritative data into OSM and gave the OSM community a chance to interact with—that is, complete, correct, or update—the authoritative data. In addition, authorities are now able to regularly compare the OSM database with the original data to pinpoint the differences (figure 3-2). Those differences are treated as potential changes and are verified using the authoritative channel at the field. Verified changes are propagated to the authoritative database. 

On the positive side, the titanic work of keeping the data sets up-to-date has been facilitated by the OSM community. Leveraging the OSM crowdsourcing mechanism, the Canadian authorities have developed a much-needed change-detection process, which helps the authorities concentrate resources and effort on areas with identified changes. Given that the authoritative database had failed to update all the originally designed spatial entities, this contribution is valuable.  

Engaging with OSM has also presented challenges. Among the issues that must be addressed are the imperfect compatibility of the two data sets (in terms of semantics and attribution), the virtual nonexistence of metadata for OSM data, and the differences in coverage (OSM is concentrated in urban areas compared to the uniform authoritative coverage). All these differences stem from the differences in the two geographic information–generating processes—that is, the bottom-up and looser OSM process versus the top-down authoritative process. Yet another issue involves a conflict between license and use terms of OSM and the intellectual property rights of Canadian authorities. 

The Canadian and OSM synergy rests mainly on two pillars: the authorities’ recognition that they have been unable to keep the national data up-to-date, and their willingness to acknowledge and trust the quality of the OSM data. Another factor contributing to the synergy is that Canadian authorities are well organized and equipped and therefore have a standard process regarding spatial data collection, change detection, and spatial data quality control and quality assurance. They can easily handle the addition of OSM data in their processes, and the results are visible, understandable, and tangible. In other words, in this case, the context in which authoritative and non-authoritative entities interact is an important influence on how easy it is to integrate the two different spatial data sets.

The Canadian experience suggests several important lessons:

+ .An authority’s recognition that it needs assistance to meet its target can trigger the turn to VGI.
+ .VGI data sets can be used by authoritative and governmental bodies to supplement or facilitate their standard operational procedures. 
+ .Differences in structure and operation mean that updates to geographic information do not move freely between the two systems. 
+ .Different terms of use and license options for the two data sets can create connectivity problems. 

///Haiti./// Haiti was dramatically affected by the 7.0 magnitude earthquake of January 12, 2010. Most estimates of deaths range from 100,000 to 159,000, with Haitian government reports of over 200,000 fatalities. More than 250,000 residents were injured and more than 30,000 buildings were collapsed or severely damaged. The Haitian government and the numerous nongovernmental organizations seeking to respond to the disaster lacked accurate and up-to-date maps to help guide their work. The only available spatial data were poor in content and had last been updated in the 1960s; moreover, the local mapping agency collapsed in the earthquake and many of the skilled employees were lost. An updated map was urgently needed to enable distribution of supplies, attention to collapsed buildings, repair of damaged infrastructure, and provision of medical services. 

The Haiti disaster response constitutes an example of a successful project in which geographic information was released from partners to the crowd for enhancement and then returned back to government for activation—although government was rather reluctant to involve volunteers. Historical maps, CIA maps, and high-resolution imagery in Yahoo were used for tracing in OSM so that the basic maps could be improved. Within 48 hours, new imagery from the World Bank, Google, and others was also made available for tracing in OSM. According to HOT, within a month, 600 volunteers had added spatial information to OSM, and OSM was used as a default base map for the response to the Haiti earthquake.
 
Four factors explain the success of this project: the quick creation of the data, the low cost, the numerous contributions of volunteers from the OSM community, and the public release of high-resolution satellite imagery. The first two factors were summarized by the opinion that the United Nations “would have taken tens of thousands of pounds and years to do what OpenStreetMap did in 3 weeks.”<sup>25</sup> The third factor was the remote volunteers who acted quickly, coordinated their efforts, and disseminated the appeal for help all over the world. As Tim Waters puts it, “It is the first time where individuals from the comfort and safety of their own home can literally help other people save lives in a disaster zone.”<sup>26</sup> A final key factor in the success of the project was the willingness of partners to provide spatial data and imagery free of license restrictions.

Despite the project’s overall success, several challenges should be highlighted. First, despite the efforts of HOT and others, the Haitian national mapping agency (CNIGS) was never fully involved in the project. This represented a missed opportunity to establish a richer connection between the Haitian government and the OSM community. Second, the number of volunteers involved in the digitization and the speed with which it occurred caused coordination difficulties, which in turn led to duplication of data and effort.

Undeniably, what OpenStreetMap did in Haiti changed both disaster response and perceptions of VGI forever.<sup>27</sup> Overall, the Haitian experience suggests several important lessons:

+ .Crowdsourcing of mapping is a valuable ex post disaster response.
+ .Volunteers from the OSM community and the access to high-resolution imagery made the project a success. 
+ .Coordination among distributed volunteers involved in mapping is a challenge that needs to be addressed in order to ensure efficient use of their time.

///Indonesia./// The Indonesian community mapping of exposure project began in early 2011 and is still active (for more details, see section 3-4). The project’s goal was to use OSM to collect previously unavailable data, including structural data, for both urban and rural buildings and use the data in appropriate models to estimate the potential damage from natural hazards. The combination of these two components and the use of realistic data led to the development of the InaSAFE tool (discussed in section 3-22). 

The project was seen as successful from a human, technical, and financial point of view. It has enabled local government to use spatial data to visualize where people are most in danger (Chapman, Wibowo, and Nurwadjedil 2013). The community mapping component had clear leadership, specific guidelines in data manipulation, and great coordination of the different contributors. The crowd was motivated to participate (driven by a desire to improve disaster protection, win the mapping competition, or other reasons) and was supervised during the various stages of the process, and the process of data collection and manipulation was well defined. A factor contributing to the project’s success was the evaluation of the data by academics and project leaders. 

Some limitations of the project involve the quality of the results, which while acceptable overall and in some cases very good, was in some cases very poor (Gadjah Mada University and HOT 2012). There appeared to be many empty or wrong records concerning the structure of buildings. Some minor deficiencies were also noted during the implementation, such as the use of time-consuming technical methods (e.g., use of Excel spreadsheets in data collection or manual methods of data manipulation).

The Indonesian experience suggests several important lessons:

+ .An ex post response can be focused on appropriate models and parameters and can calculate the damages in case of a physical disaster by using crowdsourced spatial data sets. 
+ .Successful interaction between the VGI community and Indonesian government officials, who evaluated the data used for scenario building as reliable, led to the project’s being continued and expanded past the initial phase. 
+ .Risk managers and the local community can combine local wisdom with scientific knowledge to produce realistic scenarios for numerous different physical disasters that may occur at the area of interest. 
+ .The success of the project was due in part to the coordination of volunteers and full use of human resources and technical innovations. 
+ .The mixed quality of the attribute data is an issue of concern. 

///Imagery to the Crowd./// As shown in Haiti, facilitating the access of volunteer communities to high-quality aerial and satellite imagery can have dramatic results. Such imagery is often prohibitively expensive, however, or available only under licenses that would prevent digitization by the public. With this in mind, the U.S. State Department's Humanitarian Information Unit launched a new initiative in 2012 called Imagery to the Crowd. This program makes high-resolution imagery, purchased by the United States from providers like Digital Globe, accessible to humanitarian organizations and the volunteer communities that support them. Since its inception, Imagery to the Crowd has facilitated the digitization of basic infrastructure data into OSM in eight countries to support humanitarian response or disaster risk reduction.

Following the Typhoon Haiyan disaster in the Philippines in November 2013, Imagery to the Crowd published images for Tacloban, Ormoc, Northern Cebu, and Carles. This imagery supported a massive volunteer effort of over 1,600 mappers from the OSM community, coordinated by HOT, who contributed nearly 5 million changes to the map—changes that provided detailed information on the location and extents of pre-event infrastructure as well as offering a preliminary damage assessment (see box 1-2 for more detail). 

Technical and policy efforts are under way to increase the speed at which imagery can be released and to standardize and improve the process, but this new initiative has already achieved demonstrable results. 
