## 3-17. Morocco Comprehensive Risk Assessment Study<sup>62</sup>

*/Axel Baeumler (World Bank); Charles Scawthorn (Kyoto University, emeritus), Erwann Michel-Kerjan (Wharton Business School, University of Pennsylvania)/*

In recognition of the accelerating series of global shocks—financial crises, commodity volatility, and natural disasters—officials in the government of Morocco proactively developed and adopted a national strategy for integrated risk management (IRM). Working in partnership with the World Bank, Morocco is using this strategy to reduce the potential impacts of future crises, to increase its resilience and responsiveness when crises occur, and to support decision making on resource allocation and prioritization. This effort followed initial investment in preliminary risk profiles (see box 3-6).

This integrated risk approach was viewed as critical because not all risks are equal across the public sector; thus any risk management strategy must be appropriately targeted. An IRM approach avoids the tendency of risk management to be undertaken in “silos” and is a rare example of enterprise risk management—that is, the process of quantifying risks, comparing them with one another, and managing them in a coordinated manner—beginning to be applied in the public sector.

The IRM initiative was launched in 2008 with financial support from the GFDRR and the Swiss Agency for Cooperation and Development. It has focused on three key risk areas: (a) natural disasters, specifically earthquake, tsunami, flood, and drought events; (b) commodity (energy) price volatility; and (c) agricultural risks, comprised of drought, pests and diseases, and market price volatility. Of these, natural disaster risk has been the most extensively assessed, and the results of these assessments are discussed here in greatest detail.

The historical record of disasters in Morocco is relatively short and incomplete. However, it is clear that hydrometeorological hazard has affected the most people and created the most economic loss, whereas earthquakes have resulted in the most fatalities (12,000 people were killed by the 1960 magnitude 5.7 Agadir earthquake) and have also been a major source of economic loss. <sup>63</sup>Given that Morocco’s urban population is expected to increase 15 percent by 2025, seismic and flood risk will likewise increase unless well managed. In addition, the country already experiences more intense and frequent droughts and floods resulting from climate change, and increasingly scarce freshwater availability.<sup>64</sup>

///Probabilistic disaster risk assessment///. As part of the IRM project, a probabilistic GIS analysis tool, MnhPRA (Morocco natural hazards Probabilistic Risk Assessment), was developed and used to assess current earthquake, flood, tsunami, drought, and landslide risk in Morocco (World Bank 2013).<sup>65</sup> This software package enables users to inventory Morocco’s assets at risk, determine the hazard characteristics and assign vulnerability functions, and estimate the impacts of these hazards on the assets in a robust and quantitative manner. The impacts can be determined as estimates of the fatalities, injuries, and direct economic consequences of all possible hazard occurrences—ranging from rare and potentially catastrophic events to frequent, lower-impact events. Loss estimates are provided in detailed tables at the commune level; in summary tables at the province, region, and national levels; and as maps. Risk can be assessed under current conditions and for future points in time considering growth and urbanization as well as alternative public policies. 

MnhPRA used input-output and computable general equilibrium modelling to measure the indirect economic costs of disasters (how the economy adjusts to the shock, including the effects on household income and consumption). These models, which were developed in conjunction with the government’s High Commission for Planning, capture the interdependencies between all sectors of the economy as well as the ex ante and ex post macroeconomic decisions of the government. 

The project built a comprehensive exposure model for Morocco covering residential, commercial, industrial, and public infrastructure and agricultural assets. The exposure model was compiled through a combination of existing data sets (collected from government institutions), satellite imagery, site visits, and statistical modelling. The project found that the total value of the built environment in Morocco—that is, the replacement value of houses, businesses, factories, roads, bridges, ports, vehicles, electrical networks, and other assets—is DH 2.7 trillion (US$ 330 billion), or around DH 90,000 (US$11,000) per capita. 

Earthquake risk was found to be concentrated in the north of the country and in the seismically active area between Fez, Marrakech, and Agadir—essentially the mountainous belts formed by the collision of the African and Eurasian plates. Five provinces (Nador, Al-Hoceima, Berkane, Taza, Tetouan) were found to account for 34 percent of the estimated average annual loss from earthquake despite having only 8 percent of the national building exposure. These findings highlight the government’s opportunity to significantly reduce seismic risk in these provinces through focused investments that increase earthquake resiliency.

Floods are a chronic disaster management challenge for Morocco. Analyses showed that a significant fraction of Morocco’s total exposure is at risk from flood, but that four provinces contribute 60 percent of the total flood loss with respect to average annual loss. These findings provide a clear target for future flood mitigation investments; they also indicate which areas should give greater consideration to flood risk in future urban and land-use planning. The analyses also highlighted the effects of flood on the economy—evident, for example, in the vulnerability of the main railway line in the Gharb plains, which when damaged significantly reduces the flow of goods across Morocco.

Tsunami events were found to represent a rare but potentially devastating risk to Morocco’s Atlantic and Mediterranean coastlines, with waves as high as 10m possible in Casablanca, Morocco’s largest port. Not much attention is paid to tsunami risk, particularly in the Atlantic basin. But tsunami caused significant loss of life in Morocco after the 1755 earthquake (better known for its catastrophic effects in Lisbon).

Drought is an insidious and significant risk to the agricultural sector in Morocco, which currently employs about 40 percent of the nation’s work force. Especially at risk are the lowlands where cereal crops are grown, which are subject to considerable variation in annual precipitation. Indeed, on average, drought occurs every third year in Morocco, creating volatility in agricultural production that is the main constraint to expansion in the sector.

Cost-benefit analysis provided a key tool in communicating the costs and benefits of different risk reduction and mitigation actions. While benefits can be derived by increasing mitigation efforts, these efforts come with an increasing cost. Hence it is critical to determine, through cost-benefit analysis, the optimal level of mitigation—that is, the point where decreasing loss equals the increasing cost of mitigation.

For Morocco, the comprehensive probabilistic risk assessment allowed benefit-cost ratio (BCR) analyses to rank the effectiveness of 51 potential mitigation options. The BCR for these scenarios ranged from 54.0 to 1.1 (the higher the BCR, the more benefits for the money spent), with some specific ratios as follows: 

+ .Flood warning systems for the Ouregha subbasin: BCR = 54.0 
+ .Culverts on railway lines in the Gharb plains: BCR = 34.6
+ .Strengthening of hospital buildings in Nador Province: BCR = 5.8
+ .Risk assessment for proposed new schools in the country: BCR = 5.7
+ .Seismic strengthening of schools in Nador Province: BCR = 3.6

These BCR analyses provide a quantitative measure that promotes efficient resource allocation.  

A risk assessment also provides a higher-level perspective on the cost of various portfolio investment choices. For example, the cost to strengthen the seismic resilience of all schools and hospitals in high-risk provinces was estimated at DH 1.7 billion (US$207 million) and DH 700 million (US$85 million), respectively. For flood, early warning systems in three regions would involve a capital outlay of about DH 400 million (US$49 million), with annual operating costs of DH 40 million (US$4.9 million). Overall, total losses associated with a disaster event were typically found to be 25 to 30 percent higher than the direct losses calculated through physical loss modelling (Government of Morocco 2012). 

///Conclusions of IRM study///. The probabilistic risk assessment revealed that natural disasters will cost Morocco DH 5.0 billion (US$611 million) annually on average, of which flood contributes the greatest loss. However, the average annual loss does not fully characterize Morocco’s risk. An extreme event, such as an earthquake striking a major population center, could have direct costs on the order of DH 100 billion (US$12 billion), equivalent to 5 percent of GDP, or 23 percent of the national budget. This amount is substantially higher if indirect socioeconomic costs are considered, such as the ripple effects on other sectors of the economy. While the government would not bear the full cost of the damage to residential assets, there is an implicit liability attached to this sector, and it is likely that government aid for asset reconstruction and livelihood support would be significant. 

The loss from disasters, however, is not the sole risk for Morocco. In 2011, oil volatility in Morocco resulted in a DH 30 billion (US$3.6 billion) negative impact on the national budget, a result of the country’s existing fuel subsidy system. In 2008, the country’s agricultural risks cost an estimated DH 75 billion (US$9 billion), and projections suggest that these costs could rise as high as DH 185 billion (US$22.6 billion) by 2020. 

Quantifying these risks will help Morocco to move toward the next phase of managing the risks, mainly through dedicated investment programs targeting both physical and fiscal risks. Using risk analysis, the government of Morocco has begun to prioritize key short- and medium-term actions across all three risk categories (natural disaster, commodity price volatility, and agricultural risks). For natural disasters, short-term priorities include establishing early warning systems for flood, tsunami, and earthquake events; carrying out additional hazard and risk analyses; enhancing building code compliance; mounting an education campaign around the need for seismic retrofits in the most seismically at risk areas of Morocco; and establishing a national catastrophic insurance program for private assets. Lastly, MnhPRA has been installed in government ministries, with the aim that it will become an ongoing tool for monitoring and managing exposure and risk at both the national and local level. 
