## 3-18. Risk Assessment for Financial Resilience: The Approach of the World Bank

*/World Bank/GFDRR Disaster Risk Financing and Insurance Program/*

Risk assessment is the first step in managing disaster risk. Understanding and quantifying the risk allows policy makers to estimate the potential direct physical and human losses from adverse natural events. This information can in turn help governments, communities, and individuals make informed decisions to strategically manage their risks. Like other efforts to manage risk, financial protection strategies through disaster risk financing and insurance (DRFI) rely on risk information. Financial risk assessment and financial diagnostics build on this information to help decision makers understand financial and fiscal exposure to disaster risk. 

Experience has demonstrated that different DRFI questions require different types and resolutions of disaster risk information. For example, a national disaster risk profile undertaken at a coarse resolution could be the starting point for a policy dialogue on DRM within a country, and could be used to raise public awareness of disaster risks. It could also provide momentum for the more resource-intensive and detailed risk assessments needed to guide specific financial decisions about risk reduction investments. 

An analysis of historical loss information can inform initial thinking on DRFI. The next step in developing a robust financial and fiscal protection strategy should be a quantitative risk assessment with detailed probabilistic modelling. Historical loss data and simulated loss data from catastrophe risk models can be used as the basis of financial decision making (see figure 3-22). Financial risk analytics helps translate technical risk information into financial analysis that is useful to nontechnical decision makers. With these data as a foundation, governments can develop effective strategies that build financial resilience across society, increase the financial response capacity of the state, and protect long-term fiscal balances. 

The level of application and detail of the catastrophe risk model will depend on the decision to be made and the availability of data. Risk models for use in financial risk-transfer applications require high-resolution and high-quality data sets that can withstand scrutiny by international finance and insurance institutions. They also require robust reporting as well as methodologies that effectively convey the nature and uncertainty surrounding risk. 

///What DRFI decision making requires from catastrophe risk models///. The financial analysis enabled through simulated catastrophe risk data empowers policy makers to take more informed financial decisions in the public financial management of natural disasters. While sophisticated financial decision making requires highly detailed and granular outputs, risk modelling provides many useful applications even in the absence of such detailed data. For example, comparatively coarse and incomplete data can still be sufficient for showing governments the relative importance of different risk layers. 

But to provide the necessary level of granularity of outputs for the most complex financial decision making, catastrophe risk models risk require high-quality, high-resolution inputs of their own. Specifically, they require the following: 

+ .__A database of assets at risk (exposure module)__. A high-resolution exposure database comprised of the assets at risk to natural hazards is essential in informing DRFI decision making. At a minimum, individual risks should be identified in terms of their georeferenced location, value (economic replacement cost), usage (school, office, hospital, etc.), and construction type.
+ .__A probabilistic hazard module comprising synthetic representations of all possible hazard types__. The hazard module of a catastrophe risk model comprises a stochastic event catalog, which contains simulated hypothetical events of different magnitudes. Events are modelled with a geographic footprint of hazard values represented at high resolution, and take into account local site conditions such as soil type, surface roughness, or elevation. It is important that the event catalog is well calibrated to historical records, but also allows for extreme yet physically plausible events (even if these have a very low likelihood of occurrence).
+ .A database of asset fragility curves (vulnerability module) that make the translation from hazard and exposure to damage and loss. A high-resolution vulnerability database is crucial for linking the physical characteristics of the assets at risk with the local intensity of the hazards to determine damage and loss estimates. Fragility curves are described as mean damage ratios and will vary by building use, construction, height, and age. The vulnerability component of a catastrophe risk model must reflect the impact of these key asset components, as well as geographical changes across a country, such as those due to variations in regional construction codes and practices.

Commercial (vendor-built) catastrophe risk models that are used in the private insurance industry also generate estimates of the possible broader sectoral impacts of disasters. Some models can apply adjustments to loss calculations—either based on projections of inflation in labor costs and building materials during the post-disaster reconstruction phase arising from increased demand, or based on increases in the cost of food affecting government’s contingent liability to food security response. Particularly sophisticated catastrophe risk analyses also attempt to include potential inflation mitigation effects, such as the flow of labor and materials from unaffected regions (increased supply) and the use of public work forces.

The outputs generated by such catastrophe risk models feed into the DRFI decision-making process. Typically these probabilistic models produce 10,000 or more years of simulated event losses and are the basis for metrics such as average annual losses—an estimate of the average annual losses that a portfolio of risks would be expected to incur from the hazards modelled—and probable maximum losses—the maximum probable losses that could be expected given the model inputs. PMLs are often described in terms of either a return period of occurrence (e.g., a loss expected to occur, on average, once every 100 years) or an annual probability of occurrence (e.g., a loss expected to occur, on average, with an annual probability of 1 percent).

Deterministic (also known as “scenario” or “what if?”) catastrophe model outputs are also useful to governments because they allow analysis to focus on the financial impact of single, defined events. This approach is particularly beneficial if the country in question has a history of severe natural disasters (one or more of which may still be fresh in residents’ memory) or has neighbors that have recently experienced a catastrophic event.

///How this information is used///. Countries starting a DRFI engagement require a robust process to understand the financial risks they face and to assess and evaluate potential DRFI strategies. This process includes the statistical analysis of historical losses, case studies, and simulated risk data. Probabilistic catastrophe risk models play an important role: they allow analysts to identify the potential economic impacts of natural disasters over different time frames so that analysis can test potential approaches to risk retention and risk transfer before a severe event occurs.

Technical information generated by detailed risk models enables decision makers to carry out a range of important tasks: 

+ .Model and evaluate the cost-benefit ratio of complex financial instruments, such as (re)insurance contracts and catastrophe risk (CAT) bonds when applied as the basis of financial analytics tools 
+ .Understand potential losses due to extreme events
+ .Quantify AALs and PMLs
+ .Model different sovereign DRFI strategies, which blend risk-retention, risk-transfer, and budgetary mechanisms, to compare the protection offered and associated cost
+ .Understand how key economic assumptions in the models (such as inflation and interest rates) affect the losses

AAL and PML metrics are particularly useful for feeding into financial analytical tools, to both inform and test prototype DRFI strategies. Financial risk analysis allows decision makers to take the raw risk information and model complete financial protection strategies, and in this way to understand government’s average cost as well as probable maximum retained cost. 

AAL and PML metrics enable complementary aspects of financial risk analytics to inform decisions. The AAL metric, calculated from all possible hazards affecting a country, places the focus on the likely annual financial cost of natural disasters. Once this number (or range) is identified, it can be used to inform decisions, such as what the size of a national disaster reserve fund, and the potential annual budgetary allocations to it, should be. Graphical representations of the contributions of factors such as hazard type, geography, and affected asset classes to the AAL across a territory can help decision makers understand which factors cause most of the expected loss.

PML metrics at different return periods help to identify potential financial requirements for catastrophic events with a low annual probability of occurrence. Five-to-ten year PMLs can inform decisions about the size of potential short- to mid-term financing instruments, such as contingent lines of credit. Similarly, low annual probability PMLs (e.g., 100-year or 250-year return periods) can inform the size of financial protection instrumentation for the purpose of transferring sovereign risk to the international capital and (re)insurance markets.

An important component in DRFI is clarifying contingent liabilities of the state. Disaster risks create implicit and explicit contingent liabilities to the government budget, though these are generally not well defined in law, making fiscal risk assessment complex. Beyond explicit contingent liabilities and associated spending needs, such as the reconstruction of public assets and infrastructure, governments may in cases of disaster have a moral and social responsibility (implicit contingent liability) to offer their populations emergency assistance (such as food, shelter, and medication) and to finance recovery/reconstruction activities (e.g., through stimulus grants for rebuilding low-income housing stock).

Suitable granularity of catastrophe risk modelling output is crucial for determining the elements driving the state’s liability—that is, the key asset classes, the location of vulnerable populations, and responsibility for food security. This granularity, which depends on the clear identification of asset classes in the underlying exposure databases, ensures that only risks that the government considers to represent contingent liabilities are used in the financial analysis and evaluation of potential DRFI strategies. For example, a recent preliminary exposure database developed in Colombia for the cities of Bogota, Medellin, and Cali identified the following asset divisions: residential (low, medium, and high socioeconomic classes), commercial, industrial, health (public and private), education (public and private), and institutional (public and private). Information like this allows governments to identify the contingent liabilities that should inform DRFI decision making.

The risk information generated by financial risk assessment and modelling is not only valuable for developing comprehensive sovereign DRFI strategies. Given their high level of detail, the data sets can in some cases be adapted, often quickly and at low cost, to inform local-level planning. The Pacific Catastrophe Risk and Financing Initiative, for example, has adapted data sets in this way. (For more information, see section 3-19).

///Limitations and challenges in risk modelling for DRFI///. The use of risk assessments’ quantitative outputs for DRFI purposes is constrained by a number of challenges. First, low- and middle-income countries tend to lack the technical understanding needed to perceive the importance of ex ante DRFI initiatives and the potential gains arising from ex ante DRFI programs. Countries often lack the capacity, resources, and experience to properly use existing products. Globally, countries and international donors invest significant resources in data collection and risk modelling. But the resulting technical risk information (simulated losses, average annual losses, probable maximum losses, etc.) is difficult to understand for policy makers and often unsuitable for use in financial analysis. 

Second, appropriate risk modelling tools are still lacking in countries that need them the most. The sophisticated risk modelling tools required for DRFI analysis are generally unavailable for low-income countries and even for middle-income countries. The science required for modelling some important contingent liabilities, such as those from food insecurity, is still immature; even for better-understood risks, such as earthquakes, existing risk modelling tools are often inadequate for the needs of DRFI and require substantial improvements and additions if they are to be used for DRFI purposes. Exposure data, for example, may rely heavily on official census data and disregard unofficial settlements (such as shanty towns or squatter towns) that regularly suffer the most damage in a disaster. 

Catastrophe risk models used in low- and medium-income countries are usually not tailored to provide the type of information that is essential for DRFI (total ground-up losses suffered by the entire built inventory, number of collapsed buildings, fatalities, homeless population, impact on crops, impact on food security, etc.). Retuning existing commercial models can be an expensive endeavor. It is also important to keep in mind that the exposure data underlying risk modelling tools become obsolete quickly; some are even born obsolete or inaccurate. Using old census data to collect information on exposure in fast-growing developing countries is a risky and potentially inaccurate business, even if data are trended. Ownership from countries is needed to maintain these tools, update databases, and essentially keep them alive. This ownership is hard to establish, and significant efforts in capacity building are often needed even where it exists.

Third, underlying disaster risk information is often lacking in developing countries. DRFI solutions are only as reliable as the risk assessment models that support them, and the latter are only as good as the data used to develop them. Data on exposure may be scattered among different governmental ministries and other organizations, and may be kept in precarious conditions (see “Exposure” in part 2 for additional discussion of these challenges). Use of satellite imagery is often the only way to gather up-to-date exposure data, but the cost of acquiring such images can be prohibitive for developing countries, unless organizations provide information already in their possession free of charge for development purposes. (The U.S. State Department’s Imagery to the Crowd initiative does just that; for more information see section 3-3.)

Despite best efforts, challenges and imperfections will remain in every exposure database and need to be taken into account when modelling loss estimates. Inflated, detrended historical loss figures provide useful statistical information about the risk faced and can be used to adjust outputs from the risk model. The collection of actual loss data should complement efforts in collecting exposure data.

///The way forward///. Developing countries are increasingly requesting advisory services to proactively manage the fiscal costs of natural disasters. New financial instruments and strategies are required to address this demand, help governments increase post-disaster financial response capacity, and build domestic catastrophe insurance markets. Probabilistic risk assessment and catastrophe risk modelling tools can empower policy makers to take better-informed decisions, while technical support helps countries collect the underlying data and build the required models. More work is needed to establish the link from technical outputs to financial analysis so that nontechnical decision makers can use catastrophe risk data. Through simplifying complex technical data and providing key financial figures, DRFI analytics helps strengthen the connection of policy makers and technical experts and ensures that policy makers have the information they need to take the best decisions about financing disaster risk.

Two initiatives that exemplify how probabilistic risk assessment and catastrophe risk modelling can facilitate DRFI decision making are Mexico’s National Fund for Natural Disasters (Fondo Nacional de Desastres Naturales, FONDEN), created in 1996 (box 3-7), and the comparatively new Southeast Europe and Caucasus Catastrophe Risk Insurance Facility, or SEEC CRIF (box 3-8). 
