## 3-4. Collection of Exposure Data to Underpin Natural Hazard Risk Assessments in Indonesia and the Philippines

*/A. T. Jones, K. Van Putten, M. Jakab (Geoscience Australia); M. L. Bautista, B. C. Bautista, I. C. Narag (Philippine Institute of Volcanology and Seismology); A. Wibowo (Badan Nasional Penanggulangan Bencana); K. Chapman (Humanitarian OpenStreetMap Team)/*

Until recently, the scope and usefulness of risk assessments in the Asia-Pacific region were limited because the fundamental exposure data required were either missing or incompatible with the level of risk assessment required. But two projects in the region, one in Metro Manila and the other in Indonesia, have each found a way to develop much-needed exposure data.

In the Philippines, a state-of-the-art technological approach to collecting exposure data was used on an urban scale as part of the Greater Metro Manila Risk Assessment Project (GMMA RAP). This approach incorporated data from high-resolution aerial imagery (cm resolution) and airborne LiDAR (giving ground and building heights to mm accuracy) into GIS data sets to provide needed information about individual buildings’ location and size; it then added further information about building construction type, land-use classification, and residential population estimates. In Indonesia, a collaborative and cost-effective approach—crowdsourcing through OpenStreetMap—was used both to collect exposure data (including information on building type, building capacity, wall type, roof type, and number of stories) and to create a methodology that could be replicated across the entire country. 

///Philippines./// With the Office of Civil Defense acting as a coordinating agency, Geoscience Australia has worked with a group of government of Philippines technical agencies—known jointly as Collective Strengthening of Community Awareness for Natural Disasters (CSCAND)—to promote the goals of the Greater Metro Manila Area Risk Assessment Project.<sup>29</sup> The GMMA RAP was one of the first integrated multi-hazard probabilistic risk assessments ever undertaken for a megacity and included estimations of economic loss and potential casualties. The project was intended to provide a better understanding of exposure databases, including how to prepare them; to make exposure information available for analyzing natural hazard risk and climate change impacts in the Greater Metro Manila Area; to improve assessments of the risk of and impacts from flood (in the Pasig-Marikina River basin) and from tropical cyclone severe wind; and to improve the understanding of earthquake risk in the Greater Manila Metro Area.

To achieve its goals, GMMA RAP needed to address the challenge of gathering data in a heavily populated and highly complex urban environment. Attempting to acquire, manage, and maintain exposure information for every significant feature (there are over 1.5 million buildings, for example) was not practical given the limited available existing data and the three-year time frame of the project, and given the dearth of risk analysis tools able to handle very large volumes of exposure data.

The project team designed the GMMA RAP exposure database to make use of existing methods and draw on lessons learned in preparing exposure data for an earlier project on earthquake risk.<sup>30</sup> The database was populated with a range of data from other projects or already held by government of Philippines agencies, by Local Government Units, and by other organizations, and these were then enhanced with additional data. To support the process of developing data and offer local expertise and knowledge, a technical working group of specialists was established. Because acquiring and managing highly complex data is so difficult, and because detailed exposure data were unavailable for some areas of the Greater Metro Manila Area, the project adopted an area-based approach to exposure data development. This approach allowed data to be included in the database at a suitable level of detail while offering the flexibility to move to a feature-based approach as data became available. 

Statistical information on population and building type (e.g., from National Statistics Office Census data) was used to describe exposure characteristics for broadly defined areas (in this case, barangays, the smallest administrative division in the Philippines, equivalent to an inner-city neighborhood or suburb). This information was then supplemented with exposure data derived through a novel technological approach developed at Geoscience Australia, in which data from airborne LiDAR, which measures building heights very accurately, and high-resolution aerial imagery were incorporated into GIS models.<sup>31</sup>

Several additional data sets were derived from these LiDAR data, including a digital elevation model and a digital surface model. Both these data sets were generated with a 1m horizontal resolution to optimize them for spatial analysis. Where the digital elevation model and digital surface model were spatially coincident, the difference between their elevation values was the height of features above the ground. After vegetated areas were isolated from the derived features through analysis of aerial imagery that accompanied the LiDAR data, a model of artificial elevated areas—i.e., buildings—was left.

The extents and heights of buildings determined from the LiDAR data were then used to estimate the floor area of the buildings (which is ultimately used to determine the amount of damage a building will suffer if a hazard event occurs). The vertical distance between floors of buildings, also referred to as the inter-story height, was assumed for each relevant barangay, and this was used in conjunction with the areal extent of the building to calculate the floor area. Sample images are in figures 3-3 and 3-4. 

Finally, the collected (census) data and calculated (LiDAR) data were combined into statistical models for individual barangays based on land use. These formed the basis of the GMMA RAP exposure database and the economic loss calculations determined through the risk analysis. 

///Crowdsourcing in Indonesia./// The Australia-Indonesia Facility for Disaster Reduction (AIFDR) initiative, which is a key part of Australia’s development program in Indonesia, collaborated with the Indonesian National Disaster Management Agency (Badan Nasional Penanggulangan Bencana, or BNPB), the GFDRR, and the World Bank to develop InaSAFE (see section 3-22). The requirement to provide a spatially independent product that could be applied anywhere across Indonesia meant it was not possible to underpin the risk models with a single exposure database, as was the case in the GMMA RAP. Instead, a partnership was formed to obtain location-specific exposure information that was at the right scale, up-to-date, and complete.

To determine if OSM could be used to map exposure in Indonesia—that is, provide exposure data for impact scenarios—a community mapping pilot was developed through collaboration with the Australian aid–funded Australian Community Development and Civil Society Strengthening Scheme (ACCESS) Phase II and the Humanitarian OpenStreetMap Team (Chapman 2012). OSM provides communities with tools to quickly, simply, and easily map their environment; when mapping infrastructure, users can tag objects with information (for example, about use, wall type, roof type, capacity, etc.). This participatory mapping approach provides detailed, local-scale exposure information that can be used by governments and communities for developing impact assessments. It minimizes access and usability issues by employing low-tech approaches that are easy to carry out (for example, it uses paper maps with digital imagery that can later be uploaded into a database); and because it engages communities in mapping their own vulnerability, it has the added benefit of increasing their sense of ownership over resultant impact assessments.  

This pilot was a first attempt to use OSM to collect detailed exposure and vulnerability data and then feed it into scientific models to determine how a disaster would affect a specific location. An evaluation of OSM data showed that for the 163,912 buildings mapped in Indonesia, results were not significantly different from ground-truthed and referenced data (Gadjah Mada University and HOT 2012).
Figure 3-5 shows the increase in exposure data over time for three locations in Indonesia being mapped by OSM. The first location was Dompu, in Sumbawa (top row of figure). The second location was Jakarta (middle row), where AIFDR and HOT partnered with DKI–Jakarta Regional Disaster Management Agency, UNOCHA, World Bank, and University of Indonesia to map critical infrastructure through district workshops that captured local knowledge from urban village heads. The third location was Padang (bottom row), where HOT asked volunteers to use its online tasking manager (developed to help large groups of volunteers to map in one area without overlap or conflicting contributions) and where in two months, volunteers mapped 100,000 buildings. 

Since the end of the pilot in March 2012, over 1.3 million buildings have been mapped in Indonesia with OSM, over 900 Indonesians have been trained in the use of the software, and three universities have begun to teach OSM within their GIS program.

///Conclusions./// These two examples demonstrate different approaches to capturing exposure data where budgets, time frames, and human resources are limited, and where existing data are limited as well. Within this context, approaches to acquiring exposure data depend on the scale, purpose, and end-users of the risk assessment being undertaken, as well as on factors specific to the assessment’s location. The examples suggest, however, that procedures for collecting data may be useful for a range of applications if they are well thought out and based on a consultative process involving technical experts, decision makers, and disaster managers.

Indeed, the project in Indonesia has since been used as a template for similar endeavors worldwide and as a model for coordinating and structuring a crowdsourcing project. It is also an example of how developing countries can protect themselves from or prevent natural disasters. The project succeeded because it was supported by the local government with money and time depth; its methodology was adapted to the nature of the mapping area (rural or urban); and it was well designed and defined in terms of technical structure and human resources. Volunteers tended to remain involved with the project both because they received incentives to continue their efforts, and because they could see the importance of their efforts—that is, see how the new data they had collected could be combined with hazard layers to determine potential disaster impact. 
