## 3-1. Open Data for Resilience Initiative (OpenDRI)
*/John Crowley, Vivien Deparday (GFDRR); Robert Soden, Abigail Baca, Ariel Nunez (World Bank)/*

Risk assessments never start from a blank slate; instead they build on existing data, analysis, and historical experience. All too frequently, the data sets that are required are incomplete, out-of-date, and ill-suited to the analysis required. Moreover, data are often in forms that prevent them from being shared widely, and they therefore remain latent and inaccessible (even across ministries and municipalities within the same country). Some are blocked by technologies that lock data into proprietary ecosystems. Most are stoppered by policies that prevent release beyond small groups or are simply fragmented into bureaucratic silos that require significant investment to assemble back into a whole picture.

Yet even fusing these existing data stocks into a usable form is not enough, as the data need to capture a dynamic reality. Rapid urbanization, population growth, and increasingly climate change mean that the analysis of the potential impacts of natural hazards needs to updated more frequently and at higher resolutions than ever before. In a time of economic hardship and unequal globalization, few governments possess the resources to collate existing data or collect new data, or to analyze data and communicate the results to decision makers able to implement projects that get ahead of the disaster cycle. 

Because individual governments may not currently have the capacity to take on this work, however, does not mean that it cannot be accomplished. The task of stewarding data about shared risks should be understood as a collective effort, one engaging governments, civil society, industry, and individuals. That understanding is behind the Open Data for Resilience Initiative (OpenDRI), a growing partnership of institutions that was launched by the Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery (GFDRR) and the World Bank in 2010, and designed to make data available to those who need information about disaster risks in order to make decisions. OpenDRI offers governments and their partners a process for cataloging their existing stocks of data and placing certain types of data under open licenses that still enable ministries to retain stewardship. The initiative also offers an inexpensive method of engaging at-risk communities in the process of mapping about their changing exposure to natural hazards. Finally, it offers a way to build ecosystems of entrepreneurs, researchers, and international institutions around data that a nation manages for itself.

The OpenDRI approach to managing risk data. Since 2010, the GFDRR has worked with the World Bank to implement OpenDRI in over 20 countries, including Indonesia, Haiti, Nepal, Sri Lanka, and Malawi. The program is designed to build the necessary data for quantifying and mapping risk and for communicating the results to a wide range of decision makers at various levels, from national to community. The OpenDRI team works with governments to harness the value of open data practices in the service of more effective disaster risk management (DRM) and climate change adaptation. 

OpenDRI projects offer a menu of approaches for building and using risk data and information: 

+ .__Collation and sharing of data and information through open geospatial catalogs__. Here local partners are supported to identify, prepare, and release existing hazard, exposure, and risk data via an online geospatial catalog. Recognizing a need to move away from proprietary software platforms, GFDRR and the World Bank have been active in leading and developing the open source platform GeoNode (http://geonode.org/), which provides tools that allow users to upload, visualize, and share data as well as simply produce maps. The platform also enables clients to federate multiple GeoNodes so that each ministry can retain custody of the data and choose which data sets are made available through open licenses. Figure 3-1 highlights GeoNodes supported by GFDRR and the World Bank. 

+ .__Collection of exposure data with participatory mapping__. Participatory mapping, also known as crowdsourcing and volunteer geospatial information, provides a way for countries and cities to create fundamental data on their infrastructure, including attributes such as building vintage, construction materials, elevation, use, and number of stories—information critical for quantifying risk. Here support is provided to communities and governments to build this asset database from the bottom up, by (for example) collecting data through open platforms like OpenStreetMap (OSM; described in box 1-2 above). Under this approach OpenDRI has sought to build the capacity of national OSM chapters and train them to collect data about the exposure of the built environment to natural hazards. OpenDRI has supported the collection of data on millions of buildings during its programs.
+ .__Catalyzing open data ecosystems__. The development of a community around DRM data is critical for fostering information sharing, providing training, and creating the network of decision makers who apply data to understanding their risks from natural hazards and climate change. This work includes establishing a community of technologists and organizers who build applications and tools using risk data at “hackathons”—such as the 2014 Code for Resilience, which builds on previous Random Hacks of Kindness activities.<sup>21</sup> Moreover, there is a realization that the OpenDRI program requires many actors all striving toward a collective vision and goal, so efforts to engage with a wide range of public, private, and academic stakeholders to meet collective challenges—for example, improving access to appropriate-resolution digital elevation models—are a fundamental part of this program.
+ .__Creating tools for communication of risk__. It has long been recognized that the communication of risk results to different users is a significant challenge in the global effort and one that has received insufficient attention. Support to the development of InaSAFE (described in section 3-22) is one example of efforts to overcome this challenge.

Box 3-1 offers an example of the collaborative effort possible under OpenDRI—specifically, the efforts mobilized in the aftermath of Typhoon Yolanda (Haiyan).

///Challenges remain///. Many governments have worked with partners to aggregate and centralize some portion of the data that they generate through comprehensive stock takings. However, these efforts have often failed or faltered, generally because governments perceive that sharing data means giving up control over it and losing the opportunity to make money (or gain other benefits) from it. (The loss of revenue when data are shared is a concern not only for governments, but also for the small GIS consultancies that make a living selling their data to local, provincial, and national government officials.)

Risk assessment and the need for data about potential disasters represent an easier entry point into discussions about open data than many other thematic areas (such as budget accountability), because there are often more champions where disasters are concerned, and it is easier to appeal to stakeholders' altruism. This ongoing work is rarely easy or straightforward. Opening data for wider use can raise fears, create uncertainty, and break power structures that control data flows. For this reason, OpenDRI works to empower local champions and help them build a community of leaders to advance the principles of open data, which in turn contribute to making societies more resilient. An OpenDRI field guide (GFDRR 2014), which captures the experiences and lessons learned over four years of implementation and provides a practical guide for other partners, was launched in March 2014. Section 3-2 offers a case study of the local application of OpenDRI. 
