## 3-9. Government-to-government Risk Assessment Capacity Building in Australasia<sup>40</sup>

*/A. T. Jones, J. Griffin, D. Robinson, P. Cummins (Geoscience Australia); R. U. Solidum Jr. (Philippine Institute of Volcanology and Seismology); M. V. De Guzman, A. Orquiza (Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade, Manila); S. Hidayati (Badan Geologi); I. Meilano (Bandung Institute of Technology); J. Murjaya (Indonesian Agency for Meteorology, Climatology and Geophysics)/*

During the last five years, Australia’s development cooperation program has supported a series of successful capacity-building activities for natural disaster risk assessment within neighboring Southeast Asian countries. Although the modality of engagement between the agencies has varied in each country context, the successes have been uniformly underpinned by strong, long-term bilateral government-to-government (G2G) relationships between Geoscience Australia and partner technical agencies. 

In Indonesia, the Jakarta-based Australia-Indonesia Facility for Disaster Reduction provides a forum for ongoing interactions between risk assessment practitioners from the government of Indonesia, technical agencies, and Australian risk and vulnerability experts posted in Indonesia. Earthquake, tsunami, and volcanic hazard modelling activities have increased government capacity to understand the country’s natural hazard risk profile, and these gains have in turn informed significant policy directives at the national level (e.g., the 2012 Indonesian Presidential Master Plan for Tsunami Disaster Risk Reduction).

In the Philippines, capacity-buildings activities have been facilitated through remote bilateral relationships between the government of Philippines Collective Strengthening of Community Awareness on Natural Disasters (CSCAND) agencies and Geoscience Australia staff based in Canberra. As a result of these activities, the Greater Metro Manila Risk Assessment Project (GMMA RAP) has produced one of the world’s first noncommercial multi-hazard risk assessments for a megacity on this scale. (See the section 3-4 for more information about this project.)   

///Background///. The Australian government has invested in a variety of DRM activities, including efforts to strengthen the capacity of partner government technical agencies to map risks from natural hazards. The Australian development cooperation program draws on the technical expertise of Australian government departments to help developing country partners build their capacity to reduce disaster risk. 

Geoscience Australia, the Australian government’s national geoscience agency, provides geoscientific advice and information to support governmental priorities. Geoscience Australia has had a long engagement in disaster mitigation and preparedness, primarily through the quantitative modelling of the potential risks posed by natural hazards in Australia. Geoscience Australia has accumulated important research, tools, and experience over the past 15 years as part of efforts to mitigate and prepare for the risks to Australian communities from earthquakes, tsunami, severe wind, flood, and volcanoes. This work has included the development of open source software that can be used in quantitative modelling of these hazards and risks (see “Hazard and Risk Assessment Tools” in part 2 for a review of relevant software packages). Examples include the EQRM for earthquake hazard and risk modelling (http://code.google.com/p/eqrm/; Robinson, Dhu, and Schneider 2006) and the ANUGA for flood and tsunami inundation modelling (https://anuga.anu.edu.au/). For the past six years, as part of the Australian development cooperation program, Geoscience Australia has been actively applying these hazard and risk modelling tools and experience to capacity-building activities with partner technical agencies in the Asia-Pacific region.

Two of Geoscience Australia’s official development assistance programs, with the governments of Indonesia and the Philippines, have strengthened the capacity of partner technical agencies to undertake natural hazard and risk modelling. Though the two programs faced different challenges and were delivered through different modalities of engagement, both have been considered successful. This case study outlines Geoscience Australia’s engagement with technical partners in Indonesia and the Philippines and explores the common factors that have led to significant gains in capacity in the region.

///Indonesia///. The AIFDR, in operation since 2009, represents the Australian government’s largest bilateral commitment to reducing the impact of disasters and is a key part of Australia’s development cooperation program in Indonesia.<sup>41</sup> The program aims to strengthen national and local capacity in disaster management in Indonesia and promote a more disaster-resilient region. Through its Risk and Vulnerability work stream—led by Geoscience Australia—the AIFDR facilitates partnerships between Australian and Indonesian scientists to develop and demonstrate risk assessment methods, tools, and information for a range of natural hazards. 

Two activities undertaken between 2009 and 2013 illustrate this style of partnership: the Indonesian earthquake hazard project, and a volcanic ash modelling project.

The earthquake project aimed to build the capacity of the Indonesian government to understand and quantify Indonesia’s earthquake hazard, including earthquakes’ likely location, size, and frequency. A sample hazard map developed under this project is shown in figure 3-9. Achievements include a revised national earthquake hazard map for Indonesia, designed for use within Indonesia’s building codes as well as for more general risk assessment; the capacity to maintain and update this hazard map in the future; and the production of over 160 real-time ShakeMaps and impact forecasts to inform emergency earthquake response.

The project was implemented by a partnership of Indonesian and Australian government science agencies and academic institutions with additional technical and management support from AIFDR staff (Indonesian and Australian scientists are shown working together in figure 3-10). The major deliverables were produced collaboratively with five key Indonesian agencies;<sup>42</sup> and the interagency memorandum of understanding developed among these agencies represented the first formal agreement on roles and responsibilities for understanding and managing earthquake hazard analysis in Indonesia.

In addition, significant improvements were made in earthquake education and research; notably, the program for Graduate Research in Earthquakes and Active Tectonics was established at the Bandung Institute of Technology. This program has become a crucial resource for the government of Indonesia, providing it with opportunities for earthquake-related education and collaborative research as well as independent scientific expertise. 
A mixture of modalities was used in this program. The primary form of technical assistance was direct training and mentoring of Indonesian scientists by Australian scientists who were based in Jakarta. These were supplemented with additional technical support from Canberra-based scientists through short-term (one- to three-week) missions. Funding was also provided to allow Indonesian students to study in Australia, and to allow Indonesian students and academics to undertake research in Indonesia.
The second activity designed to build the risk modelling capacity of Indonesian technical agencies focused on volcanic ash modelling. The activity’s specific goal was to develop the capacity of Badan Geologi to undertake probabilistic volcanic ash modelling using open source modelling tools. This capacity allows the government of Indonesia to rapidly assess the potential volcanic ash risk from Indonesian volcanoes. 

The first phase of the activity focused on testing and assessing existing volcanic ash dispersal models and identifying the most suitable model for adaptation and use in Indonesia. The second phase involved validating the chosen model against historical eruptions in Indonesia in order to assess the accuracy and uncertainty in the simulations, and implementing the model as part of a case study of four volcanoes located in West Java. (Field work is shown in figure 3-11.) The final phase of the activity primarily focused on building the capability to undertake near-real-time volcanic ash forecasting using the existing model.

All phases of this activity were successfully completed, with the following results: 

+ .Badan Geologi has the capacity to use volcanic ash modelling tools in Indonesia.
+ .The government of Indonesia has probabilistic volcanic ash hazard information available for four West Javan volcanoes and near-real-time forecasting information available for two North Sulawesi volcanoes.
+ .Badan Geologi has the capacity to apply the volcanic ash dispersion model using standard computers. To undertake more computationally intensive probabilistic and near-real-time forecasted volcanic ash modelling into the future, the government of Indonesia has invested in high-performance computing equipment. 
+ .Badan Geologi has determined that further engagement with Geoscience Australia and the AIFDR in volcanic ash modelling would be highly beneficial. This work would likely focus on building Badan Geologi’s capacity to produce regional and national scale map products from volcanic ash modelling.

The success of this program was demonstrated in early 2013, when Gunung Guntur erupted in West Java. After increased seismicity was detected, Indonesian volcanologists at the Volcanology and Geological Disaster Mitigation Centre assumed responsibility for using the volcanic ash dispersal models to gain some insight into how wind conditions over the coming days could affect ash dispersal. Figure 3-12 shows the center’s ash dispersal model for the last historical eruption of Guntur, in 1840.

The volcanic ash modelling activity was implemented almost entirely through short-term missions, conducted as a series of workshops hosted by both Badan Geologi and Geoscience Australia. These workshops provided an important capacity-building environment for knowledge transfer and intensive skill building. In the months between workshops, Geoscience Australia staff provided ongoing remote technical support to Badan Geologi via email, telephone, social media, and videoconference.

Philippines. In 2008, a partnership between Australia and the Philippines was formed with the aim of reducing disaster risk. During the initial years of this engagement, Geoscience Australia worked with government of Philippines technical agencies (the CSCAND agencies) on a project to strengthen natural hazard risk assessment capacity in the Philippines. 

In 2010, Australia and the Philippines developed the BRACE (Building the Resilience and Awareness of Metro Manila Communities to Natural Disaster and Climate Change Impacts) program, which aimed to reduce the vulnerability and enhance the resilience of Metro Manila and selected neighboring areas to the impacts of natural disasters and climate change. As part of this larger program, Geoscience Australia worked with CSCAND agencies on the Greater Metro Manila Area Risk Assessment Project<sup>43</sup> (described in detail in section 3-4). This collaboration contributed to the overall aims of the program by increasing the capacity of Philippine government technical experts to understand how the potential risks and impacts of natural hazards in the Philippines can be assessed.

In contrast to the Indonesia initiative, the work in the Philippines involved a multi-hazard probabilistic risk assessment for a single megacity (Manila) that included estimations of economic loss and potential casualties. Significant coordination from the Philippine Office of Civil Defense and associated agencies was needed to bring together the disparate agencies working on different hazards for the same area.

The key outcomes of the project are these:

+ .Manila and national government authorities have base data sets (such as high-resolution digital elevation models, captured through LiDAR) available for analyzing natural hazard risk and climate change impacts. 
+ .Government of Philippines technical specialists better understand, and are better able to produce, exposure databases and exposure information for analyzing natural hazard risk to and climate change impacts on the Greater Metro Manila Area.
+ .Scientists within government technical agencies are better able to assess the risk and impacts from flood (figure 3-13), cyclone, and earthquake, and better understand these risks in the Greater Metro Manila Area.

The risk maps and models developed collaboratively by the government of Philippines CSCAND agencies and Geoscience Australia were delivered to the mayors and planning officials of the Greater Metro Manila Area and selected neighboring areas to inform their decisions about planning and mitigation for natural hazards.<sup>44</sup>

Like the Indonesia volcanic ash modelling activity, the GMMA RAP was implemented almost entirely through short-term missions comprising workshops hosted by staff from both Geoscience Australia in Canberra and CSCAND in Manila. Evaluation of these programs has identified key success factors for building capacity (box 3-4).

///Conclusions///. Geoscience Australia’s long-standing engagement in official development cooperation programs with the governments of Indonesia and the Philippines has strengthened the capacity of partner technical agencies to undertake natural hazard and risk modelling. In both countries, common factors—the presence of trust and use of a catalytic approach—led to significant capacity-building gains. However, neither of these factors is achievable without the right experts: building technical capacity through a G2G relationship requires individuals with the right combination of specific technical and social skills. The success of these projects has relied upon credible, capable, and committed professional staff members whose interest in their work goes beyond the purely technical issues to be resolved and includes an understanding of partner countries’ systems, cultures, and languages.
