## 3-19. The Pacific Catastrophe Risk Assessment Initiative<sup>66</sup>
*/Olivier Mahul, Iain Shuker, Michael Bonte (World Bank)/*

The Pacific Islands are extremely exposed to natural hazards, including volcanic eruptions, floods, droughts, earthquakes, tsunamis, and tropical cyclones. With rising populations, increasing urbanization, and changes in climate, the impacts from these hazards are growing. Indeed, some Pacific Island countries (PICs) face losses that could well exceed their annual gross domestic product. The September 2009 tsunami that hit Samoa, American Samoa, and Tonga provides a tragic reminder of the potential impacts of disasters in the Pacific. This tsunami left 150 people dead and some 5,300 people—2.5 percent of Samoa’s population—homeless. It also caused extensive damage to Samoa’s infrastructure. The total cost of the tsunami—restoring infrastructure, maintaining access to basic social services, providing social safety nets to the affected population, and investing in DRM—is estimated to be a staggering 21 percent of GDP over the next three to four years (World Bank 2010a). 

In 2007, the World Bank established the Pacific Catastrophe Risk Assessment and Financing Initiative (PCRAFI) to develop disaster risk assessment tools and practical technical and financial applications to reduce and mitigate the vulnerability of Pacific Island countries to natural disasters. This was a joint initiative of the World Bank, the Secretariat of the Pacific Community Applied Geoscience Technology Division (SOPAC), and the Asian Development Bank, with financial support from the government of Japan and the Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery, and technical input from Geoscience Australia, GNS Science, and AIR Worldwide.

Under the PCRAFI initiative, the largest regional collection of geospatial information on disaster risks was created and made available for the 15 Pacific Island countries: the Cook Islands, the Federated States of Micronesia, Fiji, Kiribati, Nauru, Niue, Palau, Papua New Guinea, the Marshall Islands, Samoa, the Solomon Islands, Tonga, Tuvalu, Vanuatu, and Timor-Leste.<sup>67</sup> This information is now housed in the Pacific Risk Information System (PacRIS) platform (hosted and managed at the SOPAC) and includes the following:

+ .__Database of Historical Tropical Cyclones and Earthquakes (hazard database)__. The database is the result of an exhaustive effort to collect, merge, and process data from multiple sources regarding historical Pacific earthquakes and tropical cyclones, along with the monetary losses and impact on populations associated with these events. The historical earthquake catalog currently includes about 115,000 events of magnitude 5 or greater that occurred in the region between 1768 and 2009, while the tropical cyclone catalog includes 2,422 events from 1948 to 2008. 
+ .__Database of Accumulated Losses (consequence database)__. Most of the events included in the hazard database did not have major consequences for the human population, infrastructure, residential buildings, or crops, but some did. A consequence database was assembled containing approximately 450 events from 1831 to 2009 that affected at least one of the 15 PICs. This database, which is the most complete in existence for the Pacific region, shows that, on average, these countries have collectively experienced losses in the order of US$1 billion per decade, rising to US$4 billion in both the 1980s and the 1990s. 
+ .__Database of Assets Exposed to Disasters (exposure database)__. This database contains components for buildings and infrastructure, agriculture, and population. The exposure database was created by collecting existing data sets, remote sensing analysis, and field surveys. Country-specific data sets were used to characterize buildings (residential, commercial, and industrial), major infrastructure (such as roads, bridges, airports, ports, and utility assets), major crops, and population. For the building and infrastructure data set, more than 500,000 footprints of structures were digitized from high-resolution satellite images. These buildings represent about 15 percent (36 percent without Papua New Guinea) of the estimated total number of buildings in the PICs. Of these, about 80,000 buildings were physically checked, photographed, and classified. An additional 3 million primarily rural buildings were geo-located and classified using remote-sensing techniques. In addition to information on infrastructure and residential buildings, the database also includes topological maps and information on major cash crops, ground cover, and population. To date, this database is the most comprehensive of its kind for this part of the world. 
+ .__Database of Modeled Probabilistic Hazards and Losses__. The effort generated a variety of risk-related information, including hazard maps for earthquake and tropical cyclones for different return periods, maps of average annual losses, and summaries of key return-period levels of loss for various disaggregated subnational administration units.

The PCRAFI project used these data sets to develop catastrophe risk profiles for 15 Pacific Island nations using state-of-the-art risk modelling that simulated thousands of cyclones, earthquakes, and tsunamis. These risk models provide a robust estimation of the economic losses caused by natural disasters with different return periods. They also were the basis for maps of the geographic distribution of hazards, assets at risk, and potential losses, which can be used to prioritize DRM interventions. This analysis determined that the average annual loss caused by natural hazards across the 15 countries is about US$284 million, or 1.7 percent of regional GDP. Vanuatu, Niue, and Tonga were found to experience the largest average annual losses, equivalent respectively to 6.6 percent, 5.5 percent, and 4.4 percent of their national GDPs. The analysis also found that in a given year, there is a 2 percent chance that the Pacific region will experience disaster losses in excess of US$1.3 billion from tropical cyclones and earthquakes. 

Key outcomes of this work include the following:

1.	.A substantial investment in improving the underpinning data sets that enable robust risk modelling in the Pacific. 
2.	.Substantial efforts to ensure all data and analytical results produced under this initiative are available to all stakeholders in the Pacific, for DRM purposes, but also more broadly for development planning.
3.	.Support to PICs to highlight the potential impact of disasters from a physical and financial perspective, and assistance to nations to improve their macroeconomic planning for natural disasters.
4.	.Establishment of a catastrophe risk pool for six Pacific Island nations—the Cook Islands, the Marshall Islands, Samoa, the Solomon Islands, Tonga, and Vanuatu. This pilot program tests a risk transfer arrangement modelled on an insurance plan that uses parametric triggers, such as cyclone intensity, to determine payouts, so disbursements are quick. This insurance program recently paid out US$1.27 million to Tonga following the damage from Cyclone Ian in January 2014.<sup>68</sup>

In the future, the data provided in PacRIS can also support efforts aimed at the following:

+ .__Urban and development planning__. Planners can use the information to evaluate the impact of changes to land use and zoning based on natural hazard risk, to develop investment plans to retrofit buildings for earthquakes, or determine the benefits of raising floor levels to avoid flooding due to tropical cyclones. The data can also be used in cost-benefit analyses of proposed disaster prevention or mitigation investments. 
+ .__Improved building codes__. The earthquake and tropical cyclone hazard models provide critical information for creating and revising building codes that include country-specific seismic and wind loads; these will guide building designs that ensure adequate shelter for the population. 
+ .__Rapid disaster impact estimation__. The aim of this application is to model the expected losses from a catastrophic event immediately after a disaster using already collected baseline information on assets. Rapid assessments after a disaster will facilitate a faster flow of funds.
+ .__Understanding the impacts of disasters as the climate changes__. PCRAFI and the World Bank, in partnership with Geoscience Australia and the Pacific Australian Climate Change Science and Adaptation Program, are undertaking analyses to understand future cyclone risk to critical assets in the Pacific (see section 3-24).
